Title: Variable-Resolution Virtual Maps for Autonomous Exploration with Unmanned Surface Vehicles (USVs)

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.22667v1

Published Time: Wed, 25 Mar 2026 00:31:05 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Variable-Resolution Virtual Maps for Autonomous Exploration with Unmanned Surface Vehicles (USVs) 

> Journal Title XX(X):1–24 ©The Author(s) 2025 Reprints and permission: sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav DOI: 10.1177/ToBeAssigned www.sagepub.com/

SAGE 

Ye Li 1, Yewei Huang 2,3 , Wenlong GaoZhang 1, Alberto Quattrini Li 3, Brendan Englot 2 and Yuanchang Liu 1

Abstract 

Autonomous exploration by unmanned surface vehicles (USVs) in near-shore waters requires reliable localisation and consistent mapping over extended areas, but this is challenged by GNSS degradation, environment-induced localisation uncertainty, and limited on-board computation. Virtual map–based methods explicitly model localisation and mapping uncertainty by tightly coupling factor-graph SLAM with a map uncertainty criterion. However, their storage and computational costs scale poorly with fixed-resolution workspace discretisations, leading to inefficiency in large near-shore environments. Moreover, overvaluing feature-sparse open-water regions can increase the risk of SLAM failure as a result of imbalance between exploration and exploitation. To address these limitations, we propose a Variable-Resolution Virtual Map (VRVM), a computationally efficient method for representing map uncertainty using bivariate Gaussian virtual landmarks placed in the cells of an adaptive quadtree. The adaptive quadtree enables an area-weighted uncertainty representation that keeps coarse, far-field virtual landmarks deliberately uncertain while allocating higher resolution to information-dense regions, and reduces the sensitivity of the map valuation to local refinements of the tree. An expectation–maximisation (EM) planner is adopted to evaluate pose and map uncertainty along frontiers using the VRVM, balancing exploration and exploitation. We evaluate VRVM against several state-of-the-art exploration algorithms in the VRX Gazebo simulator, using a realistic marina environment across different testing scenarios with an increasing level of exploration difficulty. The results indicate that our method offers safer behaviour and better utilisation of on-board computation in GNSS-degraded near-shore environments. 

1 INTRODUCTION 

Autonomous exploration of near-shore waters is vital for applications including harbour inspection, canal surveying, and berth monitoring, particularly because these environ-ments pose major localisation challenges for unmanned surface vehicles (USVs). Human-made structures, such as quay walls, bridges, and port superstructures, obstruct or reflect global navigation satellite system (GNSS) signals, resulting in significant biases and outages (Makar 2023; Pandele et al. 2020). Moreover, harbour operations impose strict time constraints on USV missions, as vessel traffic can change rapidly and the presence of large moving vessels introduces significant safety risks, making it nontrivial for missions to be completed safely, accurately and efficiently. In such GNSS-degraded near-shore environments, USVs must rely on simultaneous localisation and mapping (SLAM) for pose estimation and mapping. However, extended waterways and open basins are often feature-sparse (Wang et al. 2024b; Marchel et al. 2020), and the available geometric structure is highly uneven—dense and stable near shorelines and quays, but largely absent in open-water regions. This imbalance increases the risk of SLAM drift during open-water traversal, while exhaustive surveying of low-information regions wastes valuable mission time under strict operational constraints. As a result, exploration strategies in these environments must jointly consider exploration efficiency and also the performance of the USV’s localisation and mapping processes. Existing exploration strategies only partially address these considerations. Early frontier-based (Yamauchi 1997; Stachniss et al. 2004; Leung et al. 2006) and next-best-view (NBV) (Kriegel et al. 2015; Bircher et al. 2016) methods rely on simple heuristic utility functions to enable fast exploration, but do not explicitly model localisation or mapping uncertainty. As a result, when executed in near-shore environments, these methods will often overvalue long excursions into open water, accumulating localisation drift and producing blurred or inconsistent map overlap, which leads to repeated and inefficient traversals. Most information-theoretic methods (Bourgault et al. 2002; Carlone et al. 2010; Charrow et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2019; Asgharivaskasi et al. 2025) consider entropy associated with both localization and mapping, but         

> 1Department of Mechanical Engineering, University College London, London, UK
> 2Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stevens Institute of Technol-ogy, Hoboken, NJ, USA
> 3Department of Computer Science, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, USA
> Corresponding author:
> Yuanchang Liu, Department of Mechanical Engineering, University College London, London, UK. Email: yuanchang.liu@ucl.ac.uk
> Prepared using sagej.cls [Version: 2017/01/17 v1.20]
> arXiv:2603.22667v1 [cs.RO] 24 Mar 2026

2 Journal Title XX(X)      

> Figure 1. Illustration of the WAM-V (c) in the 210 m ×500 m Harbour Basin scene (b). The VRVM map (a) and corresponding LiDAR SLAM point cloud (d) are shown. The USV is depicted in red, with the trajectory history in green. White cells indicate observed space, and gray cells denote unobserved space. Ellipses represent the covariance associated with each virtual landmark.

operating directly on probabilistic belief representations is computationally expensive. As a result, these approaches often rely on simplifying independence assumptions, such as weak coupling between the robot state and the map or independence among map grid cells. Consequently, their performance degrades as long-range correlations accumulate in large environments, and may lead to localization drift in environments with strongly uneven geometric structures. Supervised learning–based methods (Bai et al. 2017; Cao et al. 2025) accelerate decision making by learning from pre-computed, time-consuming utility functions. However, they introduce additional data collection and training overhead, often rely on GPU-class hardware for deployment, and raise generalisation concerns in the highly variable geometries typically found around ports and canals. Deep reinforcement learning–based methods (Chaplot et al. 2020; Cheng et al. 2025) select goals in the robot’s vicinity and improve the exploration–exploitation trade-off through predictive look-ahead. Nevertheless, they are prone to local optima (Placed et al. 2023), and incorporating belief-space uncertainty into fixed-dimensional network inputs remains challenging. Instead of evaluating map entropy based on an occupancy grid map, the virtual map quantifies uncertainty over a visited area using marginal covariances associated with robot state estimates and the corresponding sensing model (Wang and Englot 2017). The covariances of virtual landmarks are updated to predict how future robot observations will affect map uncertainty, using an expectation–maximisation (EM) framework. Experimental results demonstrate that the virtual map achieves a balance between accurate map-building and efficient exploration on both ground robots (Wang et al. 2019) and autonomous underwater vehicles (Wang et al. 2022). However, a uniformly discretised virtual map is less effective for USVs operating in unevenly structured coastal environments. In such settings, a grid-structured virtual map can lead to overly conservative behaviour when the vehicle repeatedly explores structure-free regions. Computational resources are expended maintaining low-entropy virtual landmarks in feature-poor areas, while high-uncertainty regions are not prioritised in a manner consistent with the vehicle’s actual sensing capability. Building upon virtual maps, we propose a variable-resolution virtual map (VRVM). While VRVM is applicable to various robotic platforms, it is specifically designed for USVs exploring large near-shore scenes, where uneven structures require a careful balance between exploration and localisation stability. VRVM maintains Gaussian virtual landmarks on a quadtree and refines only uncertainty- or occupancy-ambiguous regions inside the sensor range. This makes the per-cycle cost scale with the size of the observable region rather than with the map discretisation. We introduce an area-weighted map valuation that reduces dependence   

> Prepared using sagej.cls VRVM for USVs 3

on the current split pattern and avoids spuriously rewarding trajectories that pass through feature-sparse water. On top of this representation, we use an EM planner that selects frontiers by combining trajectory uncertainty, predicted reductions in virtual-map uncertainty, and path cost. As summarized in Fig. 1, we evaluate the VRVM algorithm by benchmarking it against a range of existing algorithms in the VRX Gazebo simulator (Saldarriaga-Mesa et al. 2025), using a LIO-SAM backbone (Shan et al. 2020), across several representative near-shore environments. VRVM achieves a compelling accuracy–coverage trade-off, with modest computational expense, compared with other planners in these structurally uneven scenes. We summarise our main contributions as follows: • To the best of our knowledge, VRVM is the first virtual map implementation to achieve real-time performance that is compatible with embedded systems. • An area-weighted map valuation strategy balances exploration and exploitation in structurally unbalanced nearshore coastal environments. • Among our results, we demonstrate a sustained 1.5-hour autonomous exploration over a 1000 m × 1000 m 

realistic near-coastal simulation environment. Our code for the proposed VRVM framework will be publicly released upon publication. The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 reviews existing autonomous exploration algorithms. Section 3 describes the graph-based SLAM backbone and the virtual map representation. Section 4 presents the proposed VRVM algorithm and VRVM-based planner. Section 5 reports the experimental results, followed by a discussion of the scope and limitations in Section 6. Section 7 concludes the paper. 

2 Related Work 

Autonomous exploration for USVs relies on three core com-ponents: maintaining reliable localisation under degraded GNSS, constructing an accurate and consistent map, and extending coverage into previously unexplored water. Recent work has concentrated primarily on the first two. Most methods (Shen et al. 2023; Engström et al. 2022; Sawada and Hirata 2023) use LiDAR–SLAM to support USV localisation under GNSS-degraded or GNSS-denied conditions, partic-ularly in inland waterways and harbour-docking scenar-ios. However, these approaches typically follow prescribed routes or berthing manoeuvres, and do not explicitly address trajectory-level decision making in marine environments. From a decision making perspective, a wide range of planning and exploration methods have been proposed. Yamauchi (1997) proposes the frontier-based approach, in which the robot navigates towards the boundary between known and unknown regions in an occupancy map. Originally developed for scene reconstruction in computer vision (Connolly 1985; Border and Gammell 2024), the next-best-view (NBV) planner selects viewpoints by maximising a notion of information (visibility) gain (Bircher et al. 2016). Next-best-trajectory (NBT) methods (Lindqvist et al. 2024) extend NBV planners by constructing a sampling-based trajectory tree and selecting the feasible branch that maximizes cumulative information gain. These methods are straightforward and provide fast and comprehensive coverage, and have been used on UGVs (Wang et al. 2024a; Zheng et al. 2025), UAVs (Best et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2024) and USVs (Song et al. 2024). However, they do not explicitly model mapping or localisation quality, and may lead to an overestimation of information gain and the accumulation of localisation error in feature-poor environments. Information-theoretic methods formulate exploration over a unified belief of the robot state and the map. Bourgault et al. (2002) is among the earliest works to evaluate candidate actions using mutual information (MI) defined over an occupancy grid map. Carlone et al. (2010); Vallvé and Andrade-Cetto (2014, 2015); Carrillo et al. (2018); Popovi´ c et al. (2020) further consider entropy-based criteria to balance mapping and localisation utilities. Saulnier et al. (2020) and Oleynikova et al. (2017) use signed distance fields for map representation to better align with Gaussian measurement models. These methods discretise the workspace into dense, uniform-resolution grids and evaluate entropy-based utilities on these representations. Chen et al. (2024) formulate USV information gathering as a non-stationary Gaussian Process regression problem to model spatial variability in uneven offshore environments. However, computing or approximating MI on dense maps or Gaussian Process posteriors is computationally expensive. To improve efficiency, Charrow et al. (2015) and Zhang et al. (2019) propose Cauchy–Schwarz Quadratic Mutual Information (CSQMI) and Fast Shannon Mutual Information (FSMI), respectively, to accelerate MI computation. Nelson et al. (2018) use the Information Bottleneck principle in conjunction with CSQMI to restrict the growth of computational and memory requirements. Nevertheless, such efficiency improvements do not change the fact that information-theoretic methods still rely on dense grid representations that scale poorly in storage and inference, while the inconsistency between occupancy-grid-based map entropy and marginal covariance-based robot state entropy makes balancing mapping and localisation utilities difficult, particularly in the absence of explicit forward propagation of the full SLAM belief. Virtual map-based methods (Wang and Englot 2017; Wang et al. 2019, 2022) are considered information-theoretic methods using expectation-maximisation (EM) (Placed et al. 2023). The main difference between virtual maps and other information-theoretic methods is the unified description of map and localisation uncertainty using covariance. Wang and Englot (2017) first propose a virtual map tightly coupled with a landmark-based factor-graph SLAM system. Wang et al. (2019) further update the virtual map to make it compatible with a pose-graph SLAM backbone, validating it in indoor environments. The robustness of this algorithm has been demonstrated in underwater scenarios (Wang et al. 2022) and extended to large-scale planning (Collado-Gonzalez et al. 2024) and multi-robot settings (Huang et al. 2024). However, these methods still inherit the common disadvantages of uniform grid representations. Various learning-based and deep reinforcement learn-ing–based methods have also been proposed. Among them, supervised learning methods (Bai et al. 2017; Chen et al.  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

4 Journal Title XX(X) 

2019; Cao et al. 2025) rely on expert demonstrations gen-erated using hand-crafted utility functions, and train deep neural networks, graph neural networks or diffusion models to imitate the resulting trajectories. While these approaches significantly reduce online computation and enable efficient long-horizon planning, their performance is fundamentally bounded by the quality and structure of the underlying expert policies. Deep reinforcement learning methods learn a policy through interaction with the environment. Zhu et al. (2018) combine deep reinforcement learning with NBV planning to guide high-level exploration decisions. Chaplot et al. (2020) present an active SLAM framework in which exploration behaviour is learned via reinforcement learning, with rewards defined purely by map coverage. Cao et al. (2024) introduce a frontier-driven exploration planner that reasons over an informative graph representation using an attention-based policy. Chen et al. (2025) adopt a semantic map representation and learn exploration strategies that balance travel cost and exploration gain. Li et al. (2025) reason over a compact heterogeneous graph to enable scalable long-horizon exploration. Vutetakis and Xiao (2025) learn a non-myopic NBV policy using active perception network, rather than information gain evaluation. Despite their architectural differences, these methods rely on simplified reward formulations that primarily account for travel cost and exploration rate, without explicitly modeling localisation and mapping uncertainty. Furthermore, all of these approaches are trained and evaluated in indoor environments, leaving their scalability and robustness in large-scale, unstructured harbor environments an open question. In summary, existing methods either focus on rapid explo-ration of the environment, or attempt to balance explo-ration and exploitation without explicitly accounting for strongly uneven geometric structure and the computational burden introduced by entropy-based utility evaluation. This gap motivates the proposed variable-resolution virtual map (VRVM), which balances exploration and exploitation by selectively modelling uncertainty over the visible region and reweighting virtual map information to favour structurally informative areas during exploration. 

3 Problem Formulation 

We consider an autonomous exploration problem that is tightly coupled with simultaneous localisation and mapping (SLAM) using factor-graph optimisation. The USV explores within a fixed 2D workspace W ⊂ R2 defined in the world frame {W }, and carries LiDAR and IMU sensors. The overall goal for the USV is to traverse the workspace, achieve full boundary coverage of all structures in W, and estimate their geometry with high mapping accuracy. During the exploration, the robot decides its own incremental goal and plans the path accordingly. Once the current goal is reached, a new set of goal candidates ( frontiers ) is selected from both the boundary of the explored region and the structure-rich areas within the known map. This selection strategy accounts for the localisation uncertainty introduced by sensor noise and environmental variations, such as wind and hydrodynamic effects, and enables the USV to balance 

exploration (gaining additional coverage) with exploitation 

(revisiting known regions to support loop closures). An overview of the exploration pipeline is presented in Fig. 2. 

3.1 Robot and Sensor Model 

The robot considered in this paper is a USV equipped with an IMU and a LiDAR sensor. We denote the USV state (position and heading) at time step t by xt = [ xt, y t, ψ t ]⊤ ∈ R3. xi

and yi denote the USV position in the world frame {W } and 

ψi is the orientation. The USV motion model is defined as: 

xt+1 = f (xt, ut) + wt, (1) where ut denotes the control input and wt ∼ N (0, Qt) is the zero-mean process noise with covariance Qt. f (·) denotes the discrete-time motion model. Two types of sensor measurements are considered: the IMU odometry measurement zimu  

> t

and the LiDAR measurement zlidar  

> t

. The IMU odometry measurement model is defined as: 

zimu  

> t

= himu (xt, xt+1 ) + nimu  

> t

, (2) where nimu  

> t

∼ N (0, Rimu  

> t

) is zero-mean IMU measurement noise with covariance Rimu  

> t

. The function himu (·) returns the relative motion between two consecutive states obtained through IMU preintegration (Forster et al. 2016). The LiDAR sensor measurement model is defined as 

zlidar  

> t

= hlidar (xt, M) + nlidar  

> t

, (3) where nlidar  

> t

∼ N (0, Rlidar  

> t

) is zero-mean LiDAR measure-ment noise with covariance Rlidar  

> t

. The function hlidar (·)

returns the LiDAR ranges at pose xt given the occupancy map M. Thus, the inverse sensor model for LiDAR glidar (·)

is given by: 

p(M | zlidar  

> t

, xt) ∝ glidar 

 zlidar  

> t

, xt

 . (4) 

3.2 Factor-Graph-Based SLAM 

A factor-graph-based SLAM framework is used to estimate the USV pose and its uncertainty, and to provide uncertainty criteria for both the virtual map and the EM planner. At time step t, let X0: t = {x0, . . . , xt} denote the sequence of USV states up to time t. Similarly, let Z0: t = Zimu 0: t ∪ Z lidar 0: t

denote the set of all measurements up to time t. The SLAM problem seeks the maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimate of the trajectory X0: t given all measurements Z0: t:

X ⋆ 

> 0: t

= arg max 

> X0: t

p(X0: t | Z 0: t)= arg max 

> X0: t

p(Z0: t | X 0: t) p(X0: t). (5) Here, Zimu 0: t = {zimu  

> i

}ti=0 contains all accumulated IMU preintegration measurements, and Zlidar 0: t =

{ zscan  

> i

, zloop  

> i

}ti=0 contains the LiDAR scan-matching measurements and LiDAR loop-closure measurements. Thus, we write the factor-graph SLAM posterior as 

p(X0: t | Z 0: t) ∝ Y

> k

exp 



− 12 rk(X0: t) 2Λk



, (6) where rk(X0: t) = hk(X0: t) − zk is the residual associated with measurement zk ∈ Z 0: t, and Λk = R−1 

> k

is the  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

VRVM for USVs 5 

> Figure 2. Overview of the navigation pipeline. The factor graph produced by LiDAR-based Graph SLAM is used to construct the variable-resolution virtual map (VRVM), which provides uncertainty-aware information for decision making.

corresponding information matrix of the measurement noise. The maximum-a-posteriori (MAP) estimate X ⋆ 

> 0: t

is obtained by solving the nonlinear least-squares problem 

X ⋆ 

> 0: t

= arg min 

> X0: t

X

> k

rk(X0: t) 2Λk

. (7) While the VRVM framework is agnostic to the underlying SLAM implementation, we adopt LIO-SAM (Shan et al. 2020), a tightly coupled LiDAR–IMU odometry and mapping system that formulates lidar–inertial fusion as inference on a factor graph and solves it incrementally using the iSAM2 (Kaess et al. 2012) algorithm. LIO-SAM maintains a 6-DoF pose trajectory in SE (3) with factors constructed from IMU preintegration, LiDAR scan matching, and loop-closure constraints. The incremental solver maintains a sparse factorisation of the linearised normal equations and updates only the affected variables when new LiDAR or loop-closure factors arrive, enabling real-time operation. Although the SLAM back-end operates in full 3D, we project each 6-DoF LIO-SAM estimate onto a planar state to support water-surface exploration and extract the corresponding 3 × 3 marginal covariance of (xi, y i, ψ i).We now describe how the SLAM results are used to compute the uncertainty criteria. Linearizing all measure-ment factors in the factor graph around the current estimate 

X ⋆ 

> 0: t

leads to the standard Gaussian approximation of the posterior, 

p(X0: t | Z 0: t) ≈ N (X ⋆

> 0: t

, ΣX ) , (8) where ΣX denotes joint covariance matrix of the USV state variables. Instead of forming ΣX explicitly, we follow standard practice in iSAM2 and query the solver for the marginal covariance blocks corresponding to the individual optimised states. For each optimised state xi, we obtain the 3 ×

3 marginal covariance Σxi . For virtual map updates, we require only the positional uncertainty, so we extract the 

2 × 2 positional block Σpi from Σxi and use it in the inverse sensor model to update the virtual map. The pair 

(xi, Σpi ) therefore defines a Gaussian belief over the USV state at time step i. This belief is used as the input to the virtual map representation and to the utility evaluation during exploration. 

3.3 Environment and Map representation 

Sensor noise and environmental factors such as wind and hydrodynamic disturbances introduce significant uncertainty into the mapping process. To account for this, we represent the environment using two data structures: an occupancy grid map M that captures the observed geometry, and a 

virtual map V that quantifies the reliability (map accuracy) of the mapped area. We then use this reliability measure as a planning criterion. The virtual map, first proposed by Wang and Englot (2017), is a grid-based representation that quantifies map accuracy by propagating the covariance of robot states and observed landmarks into the workspace through the inverse sensor model. In this paper, we employ a landmark-free adaptation of the virtual map (Wang et al. 2019) to ensure compatibility with our SLAM pipeline. The workspace W is represented by a virtual map 

V = {vk}, where each grid cell vk is initialized as a

virtual landmark , whose position is modelled as a 2D Gaussian. We distinguish between actual landmarks lk,corresponding to high occupancy-probability cells produced during exploration, and virtual landmarks vk, which model the uncertainty of all remaining cells (free or unknown). Let mk ∈ M denote the occupancy state of the k-th grid cell, with P (mk = 1) the probability that it is occupied. We define an indicator for whether a cell hosts a virtual landmark as 

Pv(vk = 1) = 

(0, P (mk = 1) ≥ θocc ,

1, P (mk = 1) < θ occ or cell unknown ,

(9) where θocc ∈ (0 , 1) is an occupancy threshold. For brevity, we refer to this quantity as the virtual-map indicator Pv(vk).In this way, geometric structure that is definitively observed (high occupancy-probability cells) is handled by the SLAM and occupancy map as actual landmarks, while the virtual map concentrates on representing mapping uncertainty in partially observed regions. For a unified and simplified map representation, we treat each actual landmark lk as a virtual landmark vk, whose associated 2D Gaussian remains unupdated.  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

6 Journal Title XX(X) 

3.4 Frontier Selection via Expectation–Maximisation 

During exploration, once the USV reaches its current goal at time step t, the expectation–maximisation (EM) planner is invoked to select the next optimal control sequence 

π⋆. Candidate control sequences are generated from aset of frontiers. We use two types of frontiers: exploring frontiers , which lie on the boundary between observed and unknown regions, and exploit frontiers , which guide revisits to previously mapped structures. For each frontier 

ai, a candidate control sequence πi is produced using the occupancy map to ensure safe navigation. For a given candidate πi, let Xt:t+h denote the hypothetical states generated by applying πi over a planning horizon of length h. The resulting end-of-horizon trajectory is defined as 

X0: t+h = X0: t ∪ X t:t+h. (10) We evaluate the quality of a hypothetical trajectory by maximising the expected complete-data log-likelihood of the measurements and the latent virtual-map variables. For a candidate trajectory X0: t+h, the EM objective is 

X ⋆ 

> 0: t+h

= arg max 

> X0: t+h

EVt|Z 0: t [log p(Z0: t, Vt | X 0: t+h)] ,

(11) where Vt denotes the virtual map inferred from all past measurements Z0: t. The EM procedure consists of two steps. The E-step computes the expected complete-data log-likelihood: 

Q(X0: t+h | X 0: t) = EVt|Z 0: t,X0: t [log p(Z0: t, Vt | X 0: t+h)] .

(12) The M-step updates the hypothetical trajectory by maximis-ing this expectation: 

X ⋆ 

> 0: t+h

= arg max 

> X0: t+h

Q(X0: t+h | X 0: t). (13) To avoid exponential growth in the number of possible virtual-map states, we replace the E-step with a classification step ( C-step ) that directly computes a deterministic estimate of the virtual map: 

Vt ≈ arg max  

> V

p(V | Z 0: t, X0: t),

= glidar (Z0: t, X ⋆

> 0: t

). (14) The computation of the virtual map is described in Sec. 4. Subsequently, in the M-step , we update the hypothetical trajectory by maximising the complete-data log-likelihood under the virtual map obtained in the C-step: 

X ⋆ 

> 0: t+h

= arg max 

> X0: t+h

log p(Z0: t, Vt | X 0: t+h). (15) Given this deterministic map, the M-step performs a maximum a posteriori (MAP) update of the hypothetical trajectory: 

X ⋆ 

> 0: t+h

= arg max 

> X0: t+h

[log p(Z0: t, Vt, X0: t+h)] , (16) 

p(Z0: t, Vt, X0: t+h) = p(Z0: t, Vt | X 0: t+h) p(X0: t+h). (17) With the optimised trajectory X ⋆

> 0: t+h

, we update the virtual map Vt+h using the inverse LiDAR sensor model glidar (·)

and compute the corresponding mapping utility based on a per-landmark evaluation criterion ϕ(·):

Umap (π) = ϕ(Vt+h),

= X

> vi∈V t+h

ϕ(vi). (18) This mapping utility Umap (π) forms one component of the overall planning objective. The complete utility function consists of three terms: the mapping utility Umap (π), the trajectory utility Utraj (π), and the energy utility Ulength (π):

π⋆ = arg max  

> π∈Π

U (π), (19) 

U (π) =  Umap (π) + Utraj (π) + Ulength (π). (20) Further details on the utility computation are provided in Sec. 4. 

4 Variable-Resolution Virtual Map 

The variable-resolution virtual map (VRVM) runs in areceding-horizon (Brugali et al. 2025) loop that couples a variable-resolution virtual map with visibility-limited prediction and an EM planner. During each control cycle, the quadtree map is adaptively refined based on depth-aware, uncertainty-driven rules, where only visible leaves are updated using the inverse sensor model. The uncertainty of reliably occupied leaves containing obstacles is held fixed to prevent redundant updates. This quadtree map serves as a reference for ranking kinodynamically feasible trajectories using a unified utility, U (π), that combines the end-of-horizon SLAM optimised pose log-determinant ( Utraj (π)), the area-weighted map log-determinant over the visible set (Umap (π)), and a path-length penalty ( Ulength (π)). The resulting formulation maintains computational complexity approximately linear in the visible-set size and remains compatible with incremental smoothing factor graph SLAM. In this section, we introduce the proposed VRVM algo-rithm. We first describe the virtual-landmark representation and its initialisation and update rules, which apply to both the classical uniform virtual map (UVM) and the VRVM. We then present the variable-resolution formulation and its implementation. 

4.1 Virtual Landmarks 

As discussed in Sec. 3.3, the position of each virtual landmark is modelled as a 2D Gaussian, 

vq ∼ N (μq , Σq ), μq ∈ R2, Σq ∈ R2×2. (21) At the beginning of exploration, all virtual landmarks are initialised with an isotropic Gaussian prior 

Σq = Σ0 =

σ20 00 σ20 ,



, (22) which expresses high and direction-independent positional uncertainty. The value of σ0 is selected to be sufficiently large relative to the covariance produced by a typical single range measurement under standard pose uncertainty. This  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

VRVM for USVs 7

follows the guideline that the prior should remain less informative than any practicable measurement update (Wang et al. 2022). To keep the computation local, the virtual map is updated only along the USV trajectory using the inverse sensor model 

glidar (·). Given a trajectory X0: t, let pk ∈ R2 denote the position of state xk ∈ X 0: t. For a LiDAR sensing range R,the set of virtual landmarks visible from xk is defined as 

V(xk) ≜

n

vq ∥μq − pk∥2 ≤ R + √2 hq

o

, (23) where hq is the half-side length of virtual landmark vq .The additional term √2 hq is the radius of the cell’s circumscribed circle and ensures that any cell whose area intersects the sensing disc of radius R is included in the visible set. Similarly, the set of virtual landmarks observed along the trajectory X0: t is defined as 

V(X0: t) ≜ [ 

> xk∈X 0: t

V(xk). (24) We now describe how each virtual landmark cell vq ∈V(X0: t) is updated. Let x⋆k ∈ X ⋆ 

> 0: t

denote the optimised USV state at time k, and let ¯zlidar  

> k

= zlidar  

> k

− nlidar  

> k

be the noise-free LiDAR measurement. Using the inverse sensing model introduced previously, we linearise glidar (x, z) around the operating point (¯ x, ¯z) = ( x⋆k, ¯zlidar  

> k

):

y ≈ glidar (¯ x, ¯z) + A (x − ¯x) + B (z − ¯z),

where the Jacobians are 

A ≜ ∂g lidar 

∂x (¯ x,¯z)

, B ≜ ∂g lidar 

∂z (¯ x,¯z)

. (25) The positional and measurement noise from time step k

are propagated to the virtual landmark as a covariance matrix 

Σy :

Σy = A Σ pk A⊤ + B R lidar  

> k

B⊤, (26) with corresponding information matrix Ωy = Σ−1 

> y

.A virtual landmark vq is typically observed at multiple time steps, and its covariance Σq must be updated accordingly. For computational efficiency, we adopt the incremental information–filter update used in (Wang and Englot 2017). For each visible virtual landmark vq , we maintain its belief in information form, Ωq = Σ−1 

> q

. Given the composite covariance Σy in Eq.(26), we update all virtual landmarks vq ∈ V (xk) using the additive information rule: 

Ωq ← Ωq + Ωy , Σq ← Ω−1 

> q

, ∀ vq ∈ V (xk). (27) Because Σy ≻ 0, this update is monotone in the Loewner order (Horn and Johnson 2013), ensuring that log det Σq

is non-increasing with each effective observation. The log-determinant of the virtual-landmark covariance provides a consistent D-optimality measure of uncertainty reduction. Thus, we define the mapping uncertainty criterion for a virtual landmark vq as 

ϕ(vq ) ≡ − logdet( Σq ). (28) The only quantity passed from the SLAM factor graph to the virtual map is the position pk and the covariance Σpk 

> Figure 3. Visualization of a portion of the classical uniform virtual map (UVM).

that appears in Eq.(26). When loop-closure factors are added to the SLAM factor graph, the resulting reduction in marginal position covariance is directly reflected in the propagated virtual-landmark covariance Σy . As illustrated in Fig. 2, virtual landmarks are stored and updated exclusively within the exploration module and are not introduced as factors in the SLAM graph. This separation ensures that coverage and localisation are coupled through a unified information-theoretic objective, while avoiding any feedback of virtual-map variables into the SLAM back-end. 

4.2 Uniform Virtual Map 

As shown in Fig. 3, the original virtual map (Wang et al. 2022) adopts a uniformly discretised grid structure. At the beginning of exploration, the workspace W is evenly partitioned into a fixed number of cells K. The resulting uniform virtual map is expressed as 

V = {vk | k = 0 , ..., K − 1}, (29) where each vk denotes a virtual map cell anchored at a fixed spatial location. The virtual map cell resolution may be identical to, or different from, the resolution of the occupancy grid used for mapping. Because the map resolution is fixed for the entire mission, the number and placement of cells do not adapt to changes in viewpoint or scene complexity. Fig. 3 illustrates a portion of the boundary between explored and unexplored regions under this uniform structure. 

4.3 Variable-Resolution Quadtree Refinement and Occupancy Locking 

Our variable-resolution virtual map is implemented using a quadtree rather than a uniform grid. In this quadtree V

(Fig. 4), each leaf vq represents a virtual landmark and carries an area indicator specifying the spatial coverage of the leaf. During exploration, the quadtree is refined adaptively to ensure that the virtual map provides the resolution needed for planning. At the start of exploration, the virtual map consists of a quadtree with a single leaf. As the robot begins to observe and explore the environment, the tree is recursively refined. As shown in Fig. 1, refinement is applied only where it benefits planning: regions with high posterior uncertainty are maintained at high resolution, whereas structure-free regions remain coarse.  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

8 Journal Title XX(X)  

> Figure 4. Visualization of a portion of the variable-resolution virtual map hierarchy over a quadtree. A correspondence between the leaf and branch cells in the quadtree and their physical surface regions is shown.

A leaf vq is split only when it is observed and its local uncertainty Σq remains high at its current resolution, or when its occupancy state is ambiguous. Formally, 

det( Σq ) ≥ τdet (dq ) or Pv(vq ) − 0.5 ≤ τp, (30) where dq denotes the depth of leaf q. We employ adepth-aware uncertainty threshold of the form τdet (dq ) = 

τ 0det 4−dq , where τ 0det is the base threshold. The term 

Pv(vq ) ∈ [0 , 1] denotes the occupancy probability at the leaf centre, as defined in Eq.(9). A refinement (leaf-splitting) termination criterion is also enforced. A leaf vq may be split only if both 

hq > r0

2 and dq < d max , (31) that is, splitting is permitted only when the half leaf size 

hq is larger than the minimum admissible resolution r0

> 2

and the quadtree depth limit dmax has not been reached. Equivalently, refinement is terminated once either 

hq ≤ r0

2 or dq ≥ dmax . (32) The parameters τ 0det , τp, and dmax are predefined constants. When a split occurs, four children are created at the centres of the subcells and are initialised according to 

Σchild = Σ0, Pv(vchild ) = Pv(vq ). (33) The full refinement procedure is summarised in Alg. 1. Leaves whose centres fall in high occupancy-probability cells are locked by setting 

Σq = Σfix =

σ2fix 00 σ2fix ,



, (34) 

Algorithm 1: Adaptive Quadtree Refinement (VRVM) 

Inputs : Root vqroot ; size floor r0; depth cap dmax ;thresholds τ 0det ; τp; init variance Σ0.

Output: Updated leaf set V. 

> 1

Function Refine( vq ): 

> 2

if vq is not a leaf then  

> 3

foreach child vc of vq do  

> 4

Refine( vc) 

> 5

else if  det( Σq ) ≥ τ 0det 4−dq ∨ | Pv(vq ) − 0.5| ≤ 

τp

 ∧ hq > r 0/2 ∧ dq < d max then  

> 6

Split( vq ) // into four children  

> 7

for i ← 1 to 4 do  

> 8

vc ← child i(vq ); Pv(vc) ← Pv(vq )

μc ← subcell centre; Σc ← Σ0

Refine( vc) 

> 9

Refine( vqroot )

Algorithm 2: Projective Occupancy Locking 

Inputs : Projected occupancy grid M; threshold 

θocc ; fixed variance Σfix .

Output: Locked leaves removed from future updates  

> 1

. foreach finest-resolution leaf vq , vq ∈ V do  

> 2

(i, j ) ← WorldToGrid  μq , M if 

M[i, j ] ≥ θocc then  

> 3

Σq ← Σfix // mark q as fixed 

and excluding them from subsequent updates and from the map uncertainty term. Locking is applied after visible-set updates in each cycle, as shown in Alg. 2. Let Nsplit denote the number of splits performed in a cycle. The computational complexity of one refinement cycle is 

Orefine = O(Nsplit ) + O(|V (xk)|) , (35) and is typically dominated by the size of the visible set. 

4.4 Area-Weighted Map Valuation 

As shown in Eq.(18), the mapping accuracy is quantified by the mapping utility Umap (π), where the uncertainty evaluation function ϕ(vq ) is defined as a log-determinant metric. For the uniform virtual map, the virtual landmarks are evenly distributed, and each one contributes with equal weight. In contrast, for the variable-resolution representation, directly summing log det( Σq ) over leaves is split-sensitive: dividing a coarse leaf into several finer leaves with similar covariances increases the total simply because the number of terms increases, which can bias decisions at earlier stages. We therefore seek a valuation that is less dependent on the current split structure while still promoting viewpoints that reduce uncertainty in high-entropy regions. For a set of virtual landmarks V, we define the split-invariant weight of a leaf vq ∈ V as 

warea (vq , V) = Aq

P  

> vr∈V

Ar

, (36)  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

VRVM for USVs 9

where Aq = 4 h2 

> q

denotes the area associated with leaf vq . By construction, these weights are normalised such that 

X 

> vr∈V

warea (vr , V) = 1 . (37) The area-weighted map uncertainty of the virtual map is then given by 

Jarea (V) = X 

> vq∈V

warea (vq , V) ϕ(vq ). (38) 

ϕ(vq ) is the mapping uncertainty criterion defined in Sec. 4.1. If a parent leaf is split into children whose covariances are locally similar to the parent covariance, the weighted sum in Eq.(38) remains approximately unchanged, so Jarea (X0: t) is locally invariant to the current quadtree split pattern. For a candidate control sequence π with an end-of-horizon trajectory X0: t+h, we propagate our variable-resolution virtual map along the discretised trajectory using the information-form update in Sec. 4.1. The mapping utility Umap (π) is then formulated using area-weighted map valuation criteria. The mapping utility Umap (π) consists of two components: the end-of-horizon virtual map uncertainty Jarea (Vt+h), and the mapping accuracy gain achieved by executing the control policy ∆Jgain (π):

Umap (π) = Jarea (Vt+h) + ∆ Jgain (π). (39) To emphasise uncertainty reduction along the executed trajectory, we define the split-invariant gain ∆Jgain (π) as: 

∆Jgain (π) = 

> t+h

X

> k=0

γk Jarea 

 Vt+h(xk) − Jarea 

 Vt(xk) .

(40) where Vt(xk) and Vt+h(xk) denote the sets of virtual landmarks visible from xk in the virtual maps constructed before and after executing the control sequence π,respectively. γk ∈ (0 , 1] is a discount factor to downweigh samples that require longer travel distance or have higher predicted pose uncertainty. We summarise our calculation of 

∆Jgain (π) in Alg. 3. In our implementation, we simplify the formulation by using a fixed γk. The virtual map itself is still updated according to Sec. 4; this area-weighted criteria is used only to rank candidate control sequences during utility calculation. 

4.5 Planning and Utility Calculation 

In this section, we summarise the overall planning pipeline of the VRVM. As described in Sec. 3.4, at each control cycle a finite candidate set Π = {π} is assembled by sampling exploring frontiers located at the boundary between known and unknown regions of the occupancy grid, together with exploit frontiers near previously observed structures to encourage loop closures and improve localisation. For each frontier, a kinodynamically feasible path is generated using a goal-biased RRT alogrithm (Urmson and Simmons 2003) followed by trajectory short-cutting. Candidates that violate collision constraints or curvature limits are discarded. Fig. 5 

Algorithm 3: Split-Invariant Mapping Accuracy Gain 

Input: Initial trajectory guess ¯X0: t+h; optimised trajectory X ⋆

> 0: t+h

; virtual maps before and after executing policy π, Vt and Vt+h; weights 

{γk}t+hk=0 .

Output: Split-invariant gain ∆Jgain (π). 

> 1

∆Jgain ← 0 

> 2

for k ← 0 to t + h do  

> 3

Vt(xk) ← Visible( Vt, xk), 

> 4

Vt+h(xk) ← Visible( Vt+h, xk)

// Extract visible sets  

> 5

St ← P   

> vq∈V t(xk)

Aq , 

> 6

St+h ← P   

> vq∈V t+h(xk)

Aq

// Area-normalisation terms  

> 7

Jt(xk) ← − P   

> vq∈V t(xk)
> Aq
> St

logdet( Σq ), 

> 8

Jt+h(xk) ← − P   

> vq∈V t+h(xk)
> Aq
> St+h

logdet( Σq )

// Are-weighted uncertainties  

> 9

∆Jgain ← ∆Jgain + γk Jt+h(xk) − Jt(xk) 

> 10

return ∆Jgain  

> Figure 5. Example of the EM–planner selecting a goal and generating an RRT trajectory over the VRVM. The USV trajectory (teal), RRT tree (purple), and goal position (yellow star) are shown together with fixed landmarks (blue), virtual landmarks (gray), and the occupancy map, where black, white, and gray denote occupied, free, and unknown regions.

illustrates the set of end-of-horizon trajectories generated by the RRT planner, shown in purple. The pose covariance of each end-of-horizon trajectory is propagated using a factor graph optimiser based on the latest occupancy map; in our implementation, we use iSAM2 (Kaess et al. 2012). The VRVM is then updated accordingly using a visible-set update along the predicted trajectory. We evaluate a scalar utility function that balances three objectives: pose uncertainty reduction, area-weighted map uncertainty reduction, and path cost. The planner selects the feasible control sequence with the highest utility value, as  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

10 Journal Title XX(X)     

> (a) Marina world of VRX. (b) Google map of the harbour.
> Figure 6. Overview of the simulated maritime environment with corresponding real-world scene taken as reference. Detailed insets illustrate the Docker Basin and Harbour Basin with annotated spatial dimensions.

defined in Eq.(20). The trajectory and energy utility terms are defined as: 

Utraj (π) = − log det  Σp,t +H (π), (41) 

Ulength (π) = −αlength( π), (42) where Σp,t +H (π) denotes the predicted pose covariance at the end of the trajectory, and α is a scalar weight that penalises longer paths. We execute π⋆ in a receding-horizon fashion: after traversing a short segment, the SLAM smoother assimilates new odometry and loop-closure factors, the VRVM fuses visible-set information, the candidate frontiers are refreshed, and the VRVM-based EM planner evaluates the candidate control sequences. The computation required to evaluate the utilities of all candidates scales with the number of sampled frontiers. The prediction cost is O

 P

> π∈Π

P 

> k

V(xk)



, with only 2×2

operations on VRVM leaves, plus the incremental smoothing updates provided by the SLAM back-end. By introducing the area-weighted map valuation and the visible-set update, we reduce the computational cost relative to EM planners whose operations scale with the map size. 

5 Experimental Evaluation 

We present a systematic evaluation of the proposed VRVM exploration framework in simulated GNSS-degraded near-shore settings. These experiments are designed to quantify the framework’s ability to maintain the previously defined balance between exploitation —minimizing localization and mapping drift—and exploration —maximizing coverage efficiency. Furthermore, we assume that USV exploration is well-motivated in the settings to follow, due to the continual “low dynamic” changes in the configuration of docked/anchored vessels and movable/reconfigurable structures common in port and harbour environments. Since achieving controlled, repeatable results in maritime environments is often precluded by traffic, safety constraints, and the difficulty of acquiring high-fidelity ground truth, we rely on the Virtual RobotX (VRX) (Bingham et al. 2019), a Gazebo *-based 3D simulator for large-scale benchmarking. Furthermore, we evaluate the computational burden on both a desktop PC and a constrained embedded system to assess the framework’s suitability for long-horizon operation on resource-constrained robotic hardware. 

5.1 Experimental Setup 

We run all experiments in the VRX simulation environment using the standard WAM-V USV platform equipped with a 16-beam 3D LiDAR and an IMU, as shown in Fig. 1. To capture the structural diversity of real near-coastal waters, we use a large, composite water-area setting (Fig. 6). It contains multiple regions with distinct geometric features, separated by narrow passages that constrain transitions and induce qualitatively different localisation conditions. This layout is specifically designed to test the exploitation-exploration trade-off. For state estimation, we use LIO-SAM (Shan et al. 2020) with GNSS inputs disabled; its 6-DoF estimates are projected onto the horizontal plane to form the planner’s SE (2) state. In parallel, we integrate the registered point clouds into a fixed-resolution 3D OctoMap (Hornung et al. 2013) and then project it to a 2D occupancy grid. This grid is the shared interface used by all planners for collision checking and coverage, so that differences in results cannot be attributed to inconsistent map sources or evaluation back-ends. We compare VRVM against four representative explo-ration baselines: Nearest Frontier (NF) (Keidar and Kaminka 2013), Next-Best-View (NBV) (Selin et al. 2019), Fast Shan-non Mutual Information (FSMI) (Zhang et al. 2019), and  

> ∗https://gazebosim.org/home
> Prepared using sagej.cls

VRVM for USVs 11 

Table 1. Key hyper-parameters of the compared exploration baselines. We report only parameters needed to interpret evaluation and discussion (representation/uncertainty modelling, candidate-set size and scoring trade-offs, and replanning triggers).                                                                                                                                          

> Category / Parameter Virtual-map utilities (EM planner) Grid-based baselines VRVM UVM NF NBV FSMI
> (Wang et al. 2022) (Keidar and Kaminka 2013) (Selin et al. 2019) (Zhang et al. 2019) Workspace bounds [m] [−600 ,600]
> ×[−600 ,600] [−600 ,600]
> ×[−600 ,600] –––Base resolution [m] 1.01.01.01.01.0
> Prior std. σ0[m] 0.50.5–––VM update update 1.0update 1.0–––CI fusion on (logdet)
> ∆ω=0 .02 ,κ=1 .0
> on (logdet)
> ∆ω=0 .02 ,κ=1 .0–––Variable resolution / locking quadtree, dmax =7
> occ lock: occ th =51
> uniform grid (no split / no area weight) –––Sensor model for scoring range 30 mFOV 360 ◦
> range 30 mFOV 360 ◦–range 30 mFOV 360 ◦
> range 30 mFOV 360 ◦
> Replanning trigger & reach tol. plan 5Hz
> tol xy =4 mplan 5Hz
> tol xy =4 mtimer 5Hz yaw 360 ◦
> auto trigger yaw 20 ◦
> speed 0.3m/s timer 5Hz yaw 360 ◦
> Candidate set size (per cycle) RRT paths 100
> max iter 1000
> RRT paths 100
> max iter 1000
> max frontiers 100
> min cluster 8
> 4-connected frontier ds 100
> radii [5 ,10 ,15] mmax cand. 100
> radii [5 ,10 ,15] mCandidate geometry / discretisation / planner resolution RRT step 4msample rad. 80 mRRT step 4msample rad. 80 mA* on inflated grid edge step 80 mview step 3◦
> ray step 80 mcand. step 15 ◦
> ray step 80 mray ang. step 6◦
> Path post-processing shortcut iters 200
> spline ∆t=0 .1
> shortcut iters 200
> spline ∆t=0 .1–––Scoring form and weights EM weights:
> α=0 .3,β=0 .5
> γ=1 .0,gd=0 .1
> VM agg.: area-weighted
> EM weights: VM agg.: uniform frontier goal:
> g∗= arg min L(g)
> gain–cost:
> wu=1 .0,wov =0 .5
> α=0 .05 ,β=0 .2
> MI–cost:
> λL=0 .08 ,β=0 .2
> priors (0 .03 ,0.97 ,0.5)
> log-odds (+2 ,−2)

UVM (Wang et al. 2022). These methods share the same upstream SLAM backbone, the same occupancy-grid inter-face, and the same motion and safety constraints; their differ-ences arise only from how uncertainty is modelled and how the utility is constructed and optimised. To isolate the impact of the variable-resolution representation itself, VRVM and UVM use the same virtual-map footprint, update frequency, and measurement-noise model. Key hyper-parameters are reported in Table 1. Under these controlled conditions, we report metrics that jointly reflect task outcome and computational burden, including coverage, map error, planning time, and memory growth. All results are presented under the same termination condition: either the planner fails to find a new exploration path or localisation failure occurs. Desktop experiments are performed on an Intel i7-12700H CPU without GPU acceleration, running ROS Noetic on Ubuntu 20.04. We further deploy the VRVM/UVM exploration stack on an embedded platform—Raspberry Pi 4 Model B (4GB) †. As prior work establishes that NF, NBV, and FSMI incur low per-iteration computational and memory overhead, the embedded evaluation focuses specifically on the scalability gap between UVM and VRVM during sustained, wide-area exploration on resource-constrained hardware. All comparative results that follow demonstrate the performance of competing algorithms with identical USV initialization, across single experimental trials that are representative of the typical performance of each algorithm. 

5.2 USV Model and Simulation Platform 

Although a USV is a six-degree-of-freedom (6-DoF) rigid body in general, we restrict the planning model to horizontal-plane motion. Heave, roll, pitch, and wave-induced motions are treated as disturbances that primarily affect sensing, while their impact on planar navigation is mitigated by the low-level controller. Adopting the USV state definition introduced in Sec. 3.1, the planar configuration is parameterised by x = [ x, y, ψ ]⊤.The body-fixed planar velocity is ν = [ u, v, r ]⊤ ∈ R3,where u and v denote surge and sway velocities, and r

denotes the yaw rate. The horizontal-plane manoeuvring model for surface vessels are governed by the standard formulation (Fossen 2011): 

M ˙ν + C(ν)ν + D(ν)ν = τ + w, (43) where M is the inertia matrix, C(·) collects Coriolis and centripetal terms, D(·) represents hydrodynamic damping, τ

is the generalised control input, and w models environmental disturbances (in this work, primarily wind and waves). While the exploration objective is formulated over the planar pose 

x, Equation (43) defines the underlying feasible-motion constraints. Propulsion is realised via two aft thrusters in a differential configuration. Accordingly, we adopt an underactuated planar input τ = [ τu, 0, τ r ]⊤, where τu is the surge force and τr is the yaw moment. Let TL and TR denote the left and right thrust magnitudes, and b the lateral separation between 

> †

https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/ raspberry-pi-4-model-b/  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

12 Journal Title XX(X)       

> (a) Environment overview of the dense harbor environment. (b) Some marine obstacles.
> (c) Run 1 using VRVM. (d) Run 2 using VRVM.

Figure 7. Exploration in the dense Docker Basin environment. (a) Environment overview with the start position and the dominant exploration direction in each run. Run 1 snapshots are shown at steps 10, 30, and 66 with the final SLAM point-cloud map; Run 2 snapshots are shown at steps 30, 60, and 90 with the final SLAM point-cloud map. 

the thrusters. The mapping is 

τu = TL + TR, τr = b

2 (TR − TL). (44) For planning with step size ∆t, we use the discrete-time propagation 

xk+1 = xk + ∆ t R(ψk)νk, (45) together with bounded-speed and bounded-turn-rate con-straints 

|uk| ≤ umax , |rk| ≤ rmax , (46) to ensure feasibility on the WAM-V platform. Actuation is implemented through the Gazebo thrust interface ( usv_gazebo_thrust_plugin ), which maps normalised per-thruster commands into applied forces.   

> Prepared using sagej.cls VRVM for USVs 13

Planner-generated waypoints are converted into left/right thrust commands by a shared reference-tracking controller. All methods use identical actuation settings and controller parameters, so performance differences reported in this section are attributable to the exploration and planning layer rather than low-level control. 

5.3 Test Scenarios 

As shown in Fig. 6, the Marina world ‡ from VRX is selected as the global testbed. It provides a realistic simulation of the harbour environment in La Spezia, Italy, covering approximately 1000 m × 1000 m . Unless otherwise stated, to ensure repeatability, we keep the environmental conditions fixed across runs, including the wave and flow settings (wave height 0.3 m, current speed 1.5 m/s, wind speed 3.0 m/s). The environment is populated with six representative maritime obstacles (Fig. 7): (i) Tugboat (service vessel), (ii) Container Barge (barge-like cargo platform), (iii) Cargo Ship (small freighter), (iv) Bulk Carrier (large ship hull), (v) Navigation Buoy (fixed marker buoy), and (vi) Floating Platform (modular raft/solar platform). We derive two task-focused sub-areas from Marina to support different evaluation goals (Fig. 6). The Harbour Basin (approximately 

140 m × 140 m ) is used for functionality validation. Harbour Basin is deliberately kept small and structure-rich using obstsacle types (i), (v), and (vi), so that the LiDAR– IMU SLAM backbone remains reliable throughout the run. Removing SLAM degradation allows a controlled initial validation of VRVM’s key functional behaviour. The Docker Basin region (approximately 210 m × 500 m )serves as comparative evaluation of all methods. Utilizing obstacle types (i)–(iv), it is intentionally designed with long traversals through open water and occlusion corridors, so that localisation degradation can occur. To probe robustness under different structural supports, we instantiate three Docker Basin variants (Fig. 9, 10, 11) by changing the obstacle density. As the scene becomes sparser, the USV is more likely to enter regions with insufficient geometric features within its sensing range. Such conditions will induce the growth of localisation uncertainty and, consequently, challenge the exploration process. 

5.4 Weight Study 

To analyze the influence of the mapping weight λmap , we conduct a parameter study in the Harbour Basin scene. All parameters other than λmap are held fixed. We evaluate three representative values, λmap ∈ { 1, 5, 15 }, and visualise the exploration state at planning steps {5, 10 , 20 , 30 } in Fig. 8. When λmap = 1 , the utility is dominated by the localisation- and cost-related terms, so the planner tends to favour short, low-risk traversals that maintain a well-conditioned trajectory estimate. As shown in Fig. 8a, exploration expands steadily but remains conservative: progress is concentrated around nearby frontiers, and the explored region grows without aggressively seeking out the most mapping-informative boundaries. Increasing the mapping weight to λmap = 5 yields a more balanced exploration behaviour. In Fig. 8b, the vehicle expands the explored region more decisively, reaching a wider set of frontiers under the same number of planning steps. Qualitatively, this setting encourages trajectories that better exploit available structure within the sensor range while still maintaining reasonable travel efficiency, resulting in faster spatial growth of the explored free space. With a large mapping weight λmap = 15 , the planner becomes strongly mapping-driven. As illustrated in Fig. 8c, candidate selection is biased toward frontiers expected to provide the largest mapping benefit under the VRVM. This promotes more aggressive expansion towards structure-filled boundaries and reduces time spent on trajectories offering negligible information gain. In this controlled basin, the resulting behaviour produces rapid spatial coverage by step 30, at the expense of longer traversals and reduced emphasis on purely cost-efficient local expansion. Overall, this study confirms that λmap provides an intuitive and effective control over exploration behaviour: smaller values yield conservative, cost- and localisation-dominated exploration, whereas larger values drive more mapping-oriented expansion. Based on the qualitative trade-off observed in Harbour Basin, we set λmap = 5 for the remaining experiments unless stated otherwise. 

5.5 Benchmark Results   

> 5.5.1 Benchmark Utilities

As mentioned in Sec. 5.1, we evaluate five exploration strategies in the Docker Basin scene under three clutter levels: sparse, moderate, and dense. All methods use the same SLAM back-end and collision-aware navigation stack. Let g denote a candidate goal position, we define the utility for all methods as follows: 

NF (Keidar and Kaminka 2013) enumerates reachable frontier cells and selects the one with minimum travel cost: 

g∗ = arg max  

> g

UNF (g), (47) 

UNF (g) = −L(g). (48) 

NBV (Selin et al. 2019) follows an “information–cost” trade-off. In our implementation, the information term is approximated by G(g), defined as the number of unique unknown cells expected to become observable from acandidate viewpoint via ray-casting in the sensor field-of-view. To reduce redundancy, an overlap penalty is applied, including a minimum goal distance L(g) and a short recent-goal penalty ψ(g) to discourage repeatedly viewing already observed space. 

g∗ = arg max  

> g

UNBV (g), (49) 

UNBV (g) = G(g) − α L (g) − β ∆ψ(g). (50) 

FSMI (Zhang et al. 2019) replaces G(g) with MI (g),an explicit mutual-information style score computed as expected entropy reduction accumulated along ray casts: 

g∗ = arg max  

> g

UMI (g), (51) 

UMI (g) = MI (g) − λ L (g) − β ∆ψ(g). (52) 

UVM (Wang et al. 2022) and VRVM use the same virtual-map-based utility defined in Sec. 4. The only difference is the area weighting: UVM is uniform (no area weight), whereas VRVM introduces variable-resolution area weights.  

> ‡https://github.com/osrf/vorc
> Prepared using sagej.cls

14 Journal Title XX(X)             

> (a) λmap = 1
> (b) λmap = 5
> (c) λmap = 15
> Figure 8. Effect of the mapping weight λmap on exploration behaviour in the square-sized Harbour Basin scene. Each row fixes
> λmap ∈ { 1,5,15 }, while columns show planning steps 5, 10, 20, and 30.

5.5.2 Analysis Qualitative comparisons of the final explo-ration result over the occupancy grid (left) and the cor-responding SLAM trajectory and map estimate (right) are shown in Figs. 9, 10 and 11. Runs that terminate due to loss of reliable SLAM state estimation are marked as 

Localisation Failure .In the sparse (Fig. 9) and moderate (Fig. 10) configura-tions, the two geometry-driven baselines, NF and NBV, are the most vulnerable to localisation failure. In both cases, the resulting maps show clear signs of inconsistency around the failure region. In contrast, FSMI, UVM, and VRVM produce accurate reconstructions, indicating that their goal selection better-maintains estimation stability while still expanding exploration. The dense Docker Basin (Fig. 11) represents the most challenging configuration due to the presence of closely clustered obstacles. NF and NBV fail at an early stage of exploration, while FSMI and VRVM successfully explore the majority of the environment. UVM remains stable but is unable to identify further exploration paths relatively early in the process, suggesting that removing area weighting can lead to earlier saturation of the exploration progress under heavy clutter. The qualitative outcomes above are consistent with the quantitative results in Fig. 12. In all settings, NF and NBV exhibit abrupt Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) blow-ups associated with Localisation Failure , whereas the other methods maintain bounded localisation error until exploration terminates. The map coverage criteria shows how quickly each method expands and whether this expansion is sustained. Due to the specific characteristics of the environment, map coverage is evaluated only over areas containing structures. Under this criterion, VRVM achieves the best overall performance among the compared methods. 

5.6 Compute Scaling 

We evaluate compute scaling by comparing UVM and VRVM in the full 1000 m × 1000 m port-area scene. To cover the entire area, both UVM and VRVM use the same virtual-map array size of 1200 m × 1200 m . All runs use  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

VRVM for USVs 15 

Figure 9. Comparison of five exploration methods in the sparse Harbour Basin scenario (left: final exploration trajectory over the occupancy grid map; right: estimated SLAM trajectory and map).  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

16 Journal Title XX(X) 

Figure 10. Comparison of five exploration methods in the moderate Harbour Basin scenario (left: final exploration trajectory over the occupancy grid map; right: estimated SLAM trajectory and map).  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

VRVM for USVs 17 

Figure 11. Comparison of five exploration methods in the dense Harbour Basin scenario (left: final exploration trajectory over the occupancy grid map; right: estimated SLAM trajectory and map).  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

18 Journal Title XX(X)           

> (a) Map Error - Sparse (b) Map Error - Moderate (c) Map Error - Dense
> (d) Map Coverage - Sparse (e) Map Coverage - Moderate (f) Map Coverage - Dense

Figure 12. Map error (RMSE) and union-normalised map coverage over time in Harbour Basin scenes with sparse, moderate, and dense structure using various methods. Each subplot compares Frontier, FSMI, NBV, the Uniform Virtual Map (UVM), and the proposed VRVM. The results shown here correspond to the experimental trials illustrated in Figs. 9, 10 and 11.               

> (a) UVM host RSS (b) UVM pi RSS (c) VRVM host RSS (d) VRVM pi RSS
> (e) UVM host step (f) UVM pi step (g) VRVM host step (h) VRVM pi step

Figure 13. Performance comparison of UVM and VRVM in the port-area scene on desktop host machine and Raspberry Pi platforms. The top row presents Resident Set Size (RSS) memory usage relative to a 450 MB budget, while the bottom row displays planning step gap intervals against a 10 s failure threshold. 

the same mapping and localisation backbone and collision-aware navigation stack, the only difference is the virtual-map resolution policy. The reconstruction results are illustrated in Figs. 16, 17 and 18. Only VRVM completes full-scene exploration on the Raspberry Pi, whereas UVM fails and exhibits resource and timing pathologies (Fig. 13). On the Raspberry Pi, the acceptable RSS budget is set to 450MB to balance resource allocation between the exploration algorithm and the lower-level planning and control modules running concurrently on the system. As shown in Fig. 13a and Fig. 13b, UVM exhibits large oscillations in resident set size (RSS) on both the desktop host and the Raspberry Pi, whereas VRVM (Fig. 13c and Fig. 13d) remains within a substantially narrower range on both platforms. This narrower range of VRVM relative to UVM provides a more predictable memory footprint, which is critical for preventing system failures on memory-constrained edge devices in long-endurance missions. Figs. 13e, 13f, 13g and 13h show the goal-to-goal planning interval traces for both methods. Using a failure threshold of 10 s , UVM exceeds this limit by a wide margin on both platforms, whereas VRVM maintains goal-to-goal intervals near the 10 s scale on both the host and the Raspberry Pi. These results indicate the VRVM ability to maintain  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

VRVM for USVs 19 0 80 160 240 320             

> Relative time [s]
> 0
> 4
> 8
> 12
> 16
> Δ Peak RSS [MB]
> VRVM
> UVM
> Octomap OGM 0200 400 600 800
> Relative time [s]
> 0
> 4
> 8
> 12
> 16
> Δ Peak RSS [MB]
> VRVM
> UVM
> Octomap OGM 0100 200 300 400
> Relative time [s]
> 0
> 4
> 8
> 12
> 16
> Δ Peak RSS [MB]
> VRVM
> UVM
> Octomap OGM 0100 200 300 400
> Relative time [s]
> 0
> 4
> 8
> 12
> 16
> Δ Peak RSS [MB]
> VRVM
> UVM
> Octomap OGM

Figure 14. Change in peak resident set size (RSS) over time for VRVM, the Uniform Virtual Map, and an OctoMap-based occupancy grid map across four independent runs in the Harbour Basin scene. 2 4 6 8 10       

> Path sample index
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Information gain per metre [1/m]
> VRVM IQR
> VRVM median
> UVM IQR
> UVM median 0510 15 20 25 30
> Path sample index
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Information gain per metre [1/m]
> VRVM IQR
> VRVM median
> UVM IQR
> UVM median

Figure 15. Information gain per metre along sampled paths in the Square basin Scene (left) and the Harbour Basin scene (right). Median and interquartile range (IQR) of information gain per metre for VRVM and UVM across ten trials are shown. 

stable per-step planning intervals as the environmental representation scales. Fig. 14 compares the change in peak RSS over time for three mapping representations in the Harbour Basin scene: VRVM, UVM, and OctoMap. UVM quickly reaches a plateau at approximately 6–7 MB due to uniform allocation, while OctoMap exhibits the largest and continuously increasing memory growth as exploration progresses. VRVM maintains the lowest peak RSS and the slowest growth throughout the run. This indicates that as the explored area expands, VRVM constrains effective map growth, reducing memory load and supporting stable online operation. Fig. 15 shows information gain per metre along sampled paths in both the Square Basin scene and the Harbour Basin scene. In both scenes, VRVM consistently achieves a higher median information gain per metre than UVM, while both exhibit a similar decreasing trend as less informative candidates are evaluated. Together with the RSS and timing results, there results indicate that VRVM reduces computational demand without sacrificing exploration efficiency, and improves information gathered per unit travel under resource constraints. 

6 Discussion 

6.1 Scope and applicability of VRVM 

The primary contribution of VRVM lies in refining the uncertainty representation in the virtual-map. By coupling variable-resolution map refinement with visibility-limited updates, VRVM preserves the intended interaction between planning and SLAM-derived marginal covariances while shifting computational effort away from map bookkeeping toward trajectory-local updates. Under identical SLAM, mapping, and navigation stacks, the experimental results indicate bounded memory growth and replanning latency across long-horizon runs, supporting the conclusion that variable resolution combined with visible-set updates improve computational sustainability under constrained onboard resources. In structurally uneven scenes, VRVM further maintains bounded mapping error over longer horizons than geometry-driven baselines, which exhibit earlier localisation degradation, yielding a qualified robustness advantage in the evaluated regime. 

6.2 Mechanisms and information-theoretic interpretation 

The behavioural and computational differences observed in Sec. 5 follow directly from how VRVM modifies both the 

support and the measure of uncertainty evaluation. VRVM restricts updates to the sensor-induced visible set (Eq.(23)), applies monotone information-form updates (Eq.(27)), and evaluates map uncertainty using an area-weighted D-optimality criterion (Eq.(38)). Together, these design choices determine the dominant per-cycle workload and reshape the incentives induced by the map term in Eq.(20). From a computational perspective, visible-set updates and adaptive refinement confine repeated covariance operations to leaves intersecting the sensing footprint, shifting the dominant work from map dimensions to terms proportional to |V (xk)| and local splits. This explains the bounded memory growth and replanning latency observed under identical upstream SLAM and navigation stacks. From a behavioural perspective, the D-optimality terms reward actions that produce measurable uncertainty reduc-tion. In near-shore scenes with uneven geometric struc-ture, extended traversals through feature-sparse open water provide limited uncertainty reduction, while increasing drift exposure. Geometry-driven baselines therefore tend to overcommit to low-observability regions, whereas VRVM assigns low utility to candidates whose visible sets are weakly informative, discouraging deep excursions with-out introducing explicit heuristics. The resulting robustness advantage in sparse and moderately dense scenes follows from this alignment between valuation and observability. Area-weighted aggregation further removes split sensi-tivity by normalising contributions by physical area, ensur-ing that refinement does not artificially inflate map utility. This makes the objective locally invariant to discretisation changes and ties candidate evaluation to physical uncertainty reduction rather than representation artefacts.  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

20 Journal Title XX(X)    

> Figure 16. Global exploration trajectory within the 1000 m ×1000 m environment (Part I). The USV initiates the survey from the starting point and traverses the open water region.

Under this interpretation, VRVM should be viewed as a tractable D-optimality-driven active-exploration approxima-tion within the virtual-map framework. By aligning uncer-tainty valuation with what is observable and aggregating it in a split-stable manner, VRVM shifts exploration toward a compute-bounded and observability-aware regime without requiring dense mutual-information evaluation. 

6.3 Limitations and future work 

While variable-resolution representation improves computa-tional scalability, it introduces a resolution-dependent limi-tation. When the largest allowable cell size is classified as free, the corresponding region may be treated as sufficiently explored even though smaller-scale structure has not been resolved. This can suppress further refinement and reduce exploration pressure in areas that are nominally empty at coarse resolution but may contain unmodelled geometric detail. In addition, the split and occupancy-locking mech-anisms introduce sensitivity at the representation level. In dynamic or partially observed settings, transient misclassifi-cation can trigger premature refinement or persistent locking, distorting subsequent uncertainty valuation. Incorporating hysteresis in refinement decisions and time-decayed unlock-ing policies would mitigate such effects without altering the underlying formulation. Future work will therefore focus on field validation in representative harbour and canal environments, including systematic sweeps over wind, wave and current regimes and explicit evaluation under dynamic obstacles and vessel traffic. Methodologically, robustness to transient occupancy misclassification will be improved by introducing hysteresis in refinement decisions and time-decayed locking mechanisms. 

7 CONCLUSIONS 

Motivated by long-horizon USV exploration in GNSS-degraded near-shore waters, this work addressed a practical limitation of uncertainty-aware planning: the inefficiency and instability that arise when uncertainty must be evaluated over large, geometrically uneven workspaces under constrained onboard computation. Such environments require balancing coverage expansion with estimator stability in the presence of feature-sparse open water and dense shoreline structure. We introduced a variable-resolution virtual map (VRVM) framework that confines uncertainty updates to the sensor-visible set and refines representation adaptively, coupled with split-stable, area-weighted valuation within a receding-horizon planner. This design preserves compatibility with factor-graph SLAM while shifting computation from global bookkeeping to locally relevant updates.  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

VRVM for USVs 21   

> Figure 17. Global exploration trajectory within the 1000 m

× 1000 m environment (Part II). The path extends into the Docker Basin, where the USV maps the detailed boundaries and docked vessels. 

Across experiments in simulated representative near-shore scenarios, VRVM demonstrates improved stability and computational sustainability relative to uniform-resolution and geometry-driven baselines. These results support the conclusion that resolution-adaptive representation and valuation can move uncertainty-aware exploration toward a compute-bounded and failure-resistant operating regime in structurally uneven marine environments. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) under Grants EP/Y000862/1 and EP/X034909/1, and by The Royal Society Kan Tong Po Fellowship (KTP/R1/251117). This work was also supported in part by NSF grant 2144624, and ONR grant N00014-24-1-2522. 

References 

Asgharivaskasi A, Girke F and Atanasov N (2025) Riemannian optimization for active mapping with robot teams. IEEE Transactions on Robotics : 1077–1097. Bai S, Chen F and Englot B (2017) Toward autonomous mapping and exploration for mobile robots through deep supervised learning. In: 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, pp. 2379–2384. Best G, Garg R, Keller J, Hollinger GA and Scherer S (2024) Multi-robot, multi-sensor exploration of multifarious environments with full mission aerial autonomy. The International Journal of Robotics Research 43(4): 485–512. Bingham B, Aguero C, McCarrin M, Klamo J, Malia J, Allen K, Lum T, Rawson M and Waqar R (2019) Toward maritime robotic simulation in gazebo. In: Proceedings of MTS/IEEE OCEANS Conference . Seattle, WA, pp. 1–10. Bircher A, Kamel M, Alexis K, Oleynikova H and Siegwart R (2016) Receding horizon "next-best-view" planner for 3d exploration. In: 2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . pp. 1462–1468. Border R and Gammell JD (2024) The surface edge explorer (see): A measurement-direct approach to next best view planning. 

The International Journal of Robotics Research 43(10): 1506– 1532. Bourgault F, Makarenko AA, Williams SB, Grocholsky B and Durrant-Whyte HF (2002) Information based adaptive robotic exploration. In: 2002 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , volume 1. IEEE, pp. 540–545. Brugali D, Muratore L and De Luca A (2025) Mobile robots exploration strategies and requirements: A systematic mapping study. The International Journal of Robotics Research 44(9): 1461–1506.  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

22 Journal Title XX(X)   

> Figure 18. Global exploration trajectory within the 1000 m

× 1000 m environment (Part III). The mission concludes in the Harbour Basin after the USV navigates through a narrow waterway. 

Cao Y, Lew J, Liang J, Cheng J and Sartoretti G (2025) Dare: Diffusion policy for autonomous robot exploration. In: 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, pp. 11987–11993. Cao Y, Zhao R, Wang Y, Xiang B and Sartoretti G (2024) Deep reinforcement learning-based large-scale robot exploration. 

IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 9(5): 4631–4638. Carlone L, Du J, Ng MK, Bona B and Indri M (2010) An application of kullback-leibler divergence to active slam and exploration with particle filters. In: 2010 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems .IEEE, pp. 287–293. Carrillo H, Dames P, Kumar V and Castellanos JA (2018) Autonomous robotic exploration using a utility function based on rényi’s general theory of entropy. Autonomous Robots 42(2): 235–256. Chaplot DS, Gandhi D, Gupta S and Gupta A (2020) Learning to explore using active neural SLAM. In: Proc. Int. Conf. Learning Representations (ICLR) .Charrow B, Liu S, Kumar V and Michael N (2015) Information-theoretic mapping using cauchy-schwarz quadratic mutual information. In: 2015 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . pp. 4791–4798. Chen F, Wang J, Shan T and Englot B (2019) Autonomous explo-ration under uncertainty via graph convolutional networks. In: 

The International Symposium of Robotics Research . Springer, pp. 676–691. Chen W, Khardon R and Liu L (2024) Adaptive robotic information gathering via non-stationary gaussian processes. 

The International Journal of Robotics Research 43(4): 405– 436. Chen X, Wang T, Li Q, Huang T, Pang J and Xue T (2025) Gleam: Learning generalizable exploration policy for active mapping in complex 3d indoor scene. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision . pp. 5558–5568. Cheng J, Fan J, Li X, Rosin PL, Li Y and Zhang W (2025) Asymmetric information enhanced mapping framework for multirobot exploration based on deep reinforcement learning. 

IEEE Transactions on Robotics : 6250–6266. Collado-Gonzalez I, McConnell J, Wang J, Szenher P and Englot B (2024) Real-time planning under uncertainty for auvs using virtual maps. In: 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . pp. 8334–8340. Connolly C (1985) The determination of next best views. In: 1985 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , volume 2. IEEE, pp. 432–435. Engström A, Geiseler D, Blanch K, Benderius O and Daza IG (2022) A lidar-only slam algorithm for marine vessels and autonomous surface vehicles. IFAC-PapersOnLine 55(31): 229–234. 14th IFAC Conference on Control Applications in Marine Systems, Robotics, and Vehicles CAMS 2022.  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

VRVM for USVs 23 

Forster C, Carlone L, Dellaert F and Scaramuzza D (2016) On-manifold preintegration for real-time visual–inertial odometry. 

IEEE Transactions on Robotics 33(1): 1–21. Fossen TI (2011) Handbook of marine craft hydrodynamics and motion control . John wiley & sons. Horn RA and Johnson CR (2013) Matrix Analysis . 2 edition. Cambridge University Press. Hornung A, Wurm KM, Bennewitz M, Stachniss C and Burgard W (2013) OctoMap: An efficient probabilistic 3d mapping framework based on octrees. Autonomous Robots 34(3): 189– 206. Huang Y, Lin X and Englot B (2024) Multi-robot autonomous exploration and mapping under localization uncertainty with expectation-maximization. In: 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, pp. 7236–7242. Kaess M, Johannsson H, Roberts R, Ila V, Leonard JJ and Dellaert F (2012) iSAM2: Incremental smoothing and mapping using the Bayes tree. The International Journal of Robotics Research 

31(2): 216–235. Keidar M and Kaminka GA (2013) Efficient frontier detection for robot exploration. The International Journal of Robotics Research 33(2): 215–236. Kriegel S, Rink C, Bodenmüller T and Suppa M (2015) Efficient next-best-scan planning for autonomous 3d surface reconstruction of unknown objects. Journal of Real-Time Image Processing 10(4): 611–631. Leung C, Huang S and Dissanayake G (2006) Active SLAM using model predictive control and attractor based exploration. In: 

2006 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, pp. 5026–5031. Li Z, Zheng K, Yuan Y, Huang J, Zhang X, Wu J and Cheng H (2025) Learning to explore efficiently: Heterogeneous topological graphs and lightweight global reasoning for robotic exploration. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 10(12): 12357–12364. Lindqvist B, Patel A, Löfgren K and Nikolakopoulos G (2024) A tree-based next-best-trajectory method for 3-d uav exploration. 

IEEE Transactions on Robotics 40: 3496–3513. Makar A (2023) Limitations of multi-GNSS positioning of USV in area with high harbour infrastructure. Electronics 12(3). Marchel Ł, Naus K and Specht M (2020) Optimisation of the position of navigational aids for the purposes of SLAM technology for accuracy of vessel positioning. Journal of Navigation 73(2): 282–295. Nelson E, Corah M and Michael N (2018) Environment model adaptation for mobile robot exploration. Autonomous Robots 

42(5): 257–272. Oleynikova H, Taylor Z, Fehr M, Siegwart R and Nieto J (2017) Voxblox: Incremental 3d euclidean signed distance fields for on-board mav planning. In: 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, pp. 1366–1373. Pandele A, Croitoru A, Hulea A, Cherciu C, Radutu A, Stefanescu I, Urbanska K, Andrescu D, Dragasanu C, Trusculescu M et al. (2020) Maritime environment gnss multipath analysis in the framework of the margot project. In: Proceedings of the 33rd International Technical Meeting of the Satellite Division of The Institute of Navigation (ION GNSS+ 2020) . pp. 757–778. Placed JA, Strader J, Carrillo H, Atanasov N, Indelman V, Carlone L and Castellanos JA (2023) A survey on active simultaneous localization and mapping: State of the art and new frontiers. 

IEEE Transactions on Robotics 39(3): 1686–1705. Popovi´ c M, Vidal-Calleja T, Chung JJ, Nieto J and Siegwart R (2020) Informative path planning for active field mapping under localization uncertainty. In: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, pp. 10751–10757. Saldarriaga-Mesa B, Montesdeoca J, Báez D, Roberti F and Toibero JM (2025) Open-access simulation platform and motion control design for a surface robotic vehicle in the VRX environment. Robotics 14(10). Saulnier K, Atanasov N, Pappas GJ and Kumar V (2020) Information theoretic active exploration in signed distance fields. In: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, pp. 4080–4085. Sawada K and Hirata Y (2023) Mapping and localization for autonomous ship using LiDAR SLAM on the sea. Journal of Marine Science and Technology .Selin M, Tiger M, Duberg D, Heintz F and Jensfelt P (2019) Efficient autonomous exploration planning of large-scale 3-d environments. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 4(2): 1699–1706. Shan T, Englot B, Meyers D, Wang W, Ratti C and Rus D (2020) LIO-SAM: Tightly-coupled lidar inertial odometry via smoothing and mapping. In: 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . pp. 5135–5142. Shen W, Yang Z, Yang C and Li X (2023) A lidar slam-assisted fusion positioning method for usvs. Sensors 23(3). Song B, Zhang J, Han X, Fan Y, Sun Z and Wang Y (2024) An efficient autonomous exploration framework for unmanned surface vehicles in unknown waters. Journal of Marine Science & Engineering 12(9). Stachniss C, Hahnel D and Burgard W (2004) Exploration with active loop-closing for fastslam. In: 2004 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) (IEEE Cat. No.04CH37566) , volume 2. pp. 1505–1510 vol.2. Urmson C and Simmons R (2003) Approaches for heuristically biasing RRT growth. In: 2003 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS)(Cat. No. 03CH37453) , volume 2. IEEE, pp. 1178–1183. Vallvé J and Andrade-Cetto J (2014) Dense entropy decrease estimation for mobile robot exploration. In: 2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) .IEEE, pp. 6083–6089. Vallvé J and Andrade-Cetto J (2015) Active pose slam with rrt. In: 2015 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, pp. 2167–2173. Vutetakis D and Xiao J (2025) Active perception network for non-myopic online exploration and visual surface coverage. The International Journal of Robotics Research 44(2): 247–272. Wang J, Chen F, Huang Y, McConnell J, Shan T and Englot B (2022) Virtual maps for autonomous exploration of cluttered underwater environments. IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering 47(4): 916–935. Wang J and Englot B (2017) Autonomous exploration with expectation-maximization. In: Robotics Research: The 18th  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

24 Journal Title XX(X) 

International Symposium ISRR . Springer, pp. 759–774. Wang J, Shan T and Englot B (2019) Virtual maps for autonomous exploration with pose SLAM. In: 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . pp. 4899–4906. Wang M, Xin B, Jing M and Qu Y (2024a) An exploration-enhanced search algorithm for robot indoor source searching. 

IEEE Transactions on Robotics 40: 4160–4178. Wang Y, Liu C, Liu J, Wang J, Liu J, Zheng K and Zheng R (2024b) A laser-based slam algorithm of the unmanned surface vehicle for accurate localization and mapping in an inland waterway scenario. Journal of Marine Science and Engineering 12(12). Yamauchi B (1997) A frontier-based approach for autonomous exploration. In: Proceedings 1997 IEEE International Symposium on Computational Intelligence in Robotics and Automation CIRA’97. ’Towards New Computational Principles for Robotics and Automation’ . pp. 146–151. DOI:10.1109/ CIRA.1997.613851. Zhang Y, Chen X, Feng C, Zhou B and Shen S (2024) Falcon: Fast autonomous aerial exploration using coverage path guidance. 

IEEE Transactions on Robotics 41: 1365–1385. Zhang Z, Henderson T, Sze V and Karaman S (2019) FSMI: Fast computation of shannon mutual information for information-theoretic mapping. In: 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . pp. 6912–6918. Zheng L, Wei M, Mei R, Xu K, Huang J and Cheng H (2025) Aage: Air-assisted ground robotic autonomous exploration in large-scale unknown environments. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 

41: 1918–1937. Zhu D, Li T, Ho D, Wang C and Meng MQH (2018) Deep reinforcement learning supervised autonomous exploration in office environments. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . pp. 7548–7555.