Title: Massive Parallel Deep Reinforcement Learning for Active SLAM

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.25834v1

Published Time: Mon, 30 Mar 2026 00:12:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# Massive Parallel Deep Reinforcement Learning for Active SLAM 

Mart´ ın Arce Llobera 1, Julio A. Placed 2, Mariano De Paula 3, and Pablo De Crist´ oforis 1

Abstract —Recent advances in parallel computing and GPU acceleration have created new opportunities for computation-intensive learning problems such as Active SLAM —where actions are selected to reduce uncertainty and improve joint map-ping and localization. However, existing DRL-based approaches remain constrained by the lack of scalable parallel training. In this work, we address this challenge by proposing a scalable end-to-end DRL framework for Active SLAM that enables massively parallel training. Compared with the state of the art, our method significantly reduces training time, supports continuous action spaces and facilitates the exploration of more realistic scenarios. It is released as an open-source framework †

to promote reproducibility and community adoption. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Autonomous exploration of unknown environments can be formulated as a decision-making problem in which a robot selects actions to maximize its knowledge of the environment. When no external localization system is available, the robot must simultaneously estimate its pose while building a map of the surroundings, a problem known as Simultaneous Localiza-tion and Mapping (SLAM) [1]. As the robot moves, however, uncertainty accumulates in its pose estimate, which in turn degrades the accuracy of the constructed map. Actions are therefore needed to counteract this problem, such as navigating to highly informative areas and revisiting previously traversed regions (loop closure) to refine both robot’s localization and the map. Nevertheless, in SLAM, the robot’s trajectory is assumed to be predefined, or the robot is controlled by a human operator. Thus, the effect of the robot choosing different actions on the accuracy of its location and the quality of the constructed map is not explicitly considered. Active SLAM (ASLAM) [2] extends the SLAM problem by incorporating decision-making into the estimation process. It can be defined as controlling a robot performing SLAM in order to reduce uncertainty in both its pose and map repre-sentation while exploring an unknown environment. Typically, ASLAM involves identifying candidate exploration locations, evaluating the expected information gain of possible actions, and selecting the action that maximizes a utility measure [3].                                                    

> This work was partially supported by DGA FSE T73 23R, and UBA-CyT (20020220200126BA).
> 1Mart´ ın Arce Llobera and Pablo De Crist´ oforis are with Facultad de Ciencias Exactas yNaturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autonoma de Buenos Aires, C1428EGA, Argentina ({marcellobera,pdecris }@dc.uba.ar ).
> 2Julio A. Placed is with the Instituto Tecnol´ ogico de Arag´ on (ITA) and the University of Zaragoza, Mar´ ıa de Luna 3-7, Zaragoza, Spain (jplaced@ita.es ).
> 3Mariano De Paula is with INTELYMEC, Centro de Investigaciones en F´ ısica eIngenier´ ıa del Centro (CIFICEN), UNICEN-CICPBA-CONICET, Olavarr´ ıa, Buenos Aires, Argentina (mariano.depaula@fio.unicen.edu.ar ).
> †https://anonymous.4open.science/r/pdrl-aslam-8BE7

Fig. 1: Parallel DRL training with 750 robots (cyan). The proposed pipeline leverages NVIDIA Isaac Sim/Lab for Active SLAM training in a GPU-accelerated environment. Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has emerged as a promising approach for ASLAM due to its ability to han-dle partial observability and high-dimensional sensory inputs. Deep neural networks can process noisy observations such as LiDAR or camera data while implicitly representing the agent’s belief about the true state. Moreover, DRL enables learning exploration strategies directly from interaction with the environment, without requiring explicit models of dynam-ics or observation processes [4]. However, most DRL-based ASLAM approaches rely on highly simplified assumptions, including small discrete ac-tion spaces and simplified two-dimensional environments. Al-though these assumptions ease training, they greatly limit the applicability of such systems on real robots and scenarios. The extremely long training time is arguably the pri-mary factor hindering the widespread adoption of DRL for ASLAM [3]. In this work, we address this limitation by introducing a novel GPU-accelerated framework that enables massively parallel DRL training for Active SLAM. By leveraging the NVIDIA Isaac Sim/Lab simulator, our ap-proach allows hundreds of agents to be trained simultaneously (Fig. 1), drastically reducing training time while enabling more realistic environments and continuous action spaces. The main contributions of this work are:  

> •

A scalable end-to-end pipeline for parallel DRL training in Active SLAM with continuous action spaces.  

> •

A GPU-vectorized fixed-lag SLAM backbone enabling efficient pose covariance extraction.  

> •

An Active SLAM formulation that uses pose covari-ance to guide exploration and relocalization through an uncertainty-aware reward function.  

> arXiv:2603.25834v1 [cs.RO] 26 Mar 2026 •

A SLAM-agnostic training bridge that enables fine-tuning with arbitrary ROS2-based SLAM backbones, facilitating transfer to more realistic and complex scenarios. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. DRL-based Active SLAM 

Placed and Castellanos [5] present one of the first frame-works integrating model-free DRL into Active SLAM, for-mulating exploration as a sequential decision-making task in which the agent learns a navigation policy without explicit models of state transitions or observation probabilities. Their method uses reward functions based on true uncertainty met-rics (D-optimality) and a Double Dueling Deep Q-Network (D3QN) that processes LiDAR observations and outputs dis-crete navigation actions. Although this work established the foundations for DRL-based ASLAM, it presents several limi-tations: the action space is highly discretized, training requires more than 60 hours to converge, and experiments are restricted to simplified Gazebo environments. These limitations highlight the need for approaches that accelerate training and support more realistic scenes and complex action spaces. Several works have attempted to address these limitations. Alcalde et al. [6] adopt Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) to improve training efficiency, while Zhao and Hwang [7] employ Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) to intro-duce continuous actions, and proposes an ad-hoc exploration-exploitation reward, although it is not grounded in principled uncertainty metrics. Chen et al. [8] propose a LiDAR-based end-to-end framework based on a dual-branch D3QN that incorporates occupancy-grid representations to improve long-term decision making. Although their method improves gen-eralization performance in Gazebo environments and shows limited sim-to-real transfer, it still relies on a discrete action space and purely reactive policies. Other works apply DRL only to specific components of the ASLAM pipeline rather than adopting an end-to-end for-mulation. In these approaches, candidate exploration locations (i.e. , frontiers) are first generated and DRL is used to select the next target location. Chen et al. [9] employ information-theoretic rewards with a DQN architecture, while Niroui et al. [10] combine optimality criteria with an Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic (A3C) algorithm. Similarly, Li et al. [11] incorporate map entropy into the reward function to guide goal selection. Cimurs et al. [12] propose a DRL-based exploration frame-work in which frontier identification and selection rely on classical information-theoretic utilities, while a Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic (TD3) policy gradient architecture is used to train the motion policy, which allows to consider a contin-uous action space. Although the method improves exploration efficiency, long training times limit its practical deployment. Moreover, the deterministic policy may reduce exploration capability and lead to local optima. Due to the complexity of end-to-end ASLAM, many works adopt task decomposition strategies in which SLAM, planning, and DRL modules are trained separately. For example, Chaplot 

et al. [13] train two separate policies to capture short- and long-term behaviors. Alcalde et al. [6] introduce DA-SLAM, which combines map completeness and pose uncertainty re-wards but relies on discrete actions and simplified environ-ments. Similarly, Zhao and Hwang [7] combine Cartographer with a DDPG-based planner, while Chen et al. [8] propose an end-to-end LiDAR framework based on D3QN. However, these methods typically rely on single-robot training and lack scalable parallel learning pipelines. 

B. Scalable Training Environments 

Training DRL policies requires a simulation environment capable of generating large amounts of interaction data. Since real-world training is impractical, simulators play a central role in the learning process. Gazebo has been widely used in robotics research due to its sensor models and integration with ROS [5–8, 12]. However, Gazebo simulations are often simplified and relatively slow, which significantly increases DRL training time and limits scalability. Recent GPU-accelerated simulators provide a promising alternative. NVIDIA Isaac Sim/Lab enables massively parallel simulation on GPUs, drastically accelerating training while providing realistic physics and sensor models. In a related direction, NavRL [14] demonstrates a large-scale training pipeline in Isaac Sim/Lab capable of training thousands of quadcopters simultaneously. The authors also introduce abridge between Isaac Lab and ROS 2 that allows sensor data to be exchanged through ROS topics. However, this bridge is designed primarily for inference and does not support DRL training within ROS-based pipelines. Building on these ideas, we propose an end-to-end frame-work for scalable DRL training in Active SLAM. Our ap-proach leverages GPU-based simulation to train hundreds of agents in parallel while maintaining realistic sensor models and continuous control. Additionally, we introduce a training bridge wrapper that enables fine-tuning with arbitrary ROS2-based SLAM backbones, facilitating transfer to more realistic and complex scenarios. III. P ROPOSED METHOD 

A. Overview 

The proposed framework addresses ASLAM as a learning control problem in which a mobile robot must simultaneously explore and map an unknown environment while maintaining a reliable localization. Unlike classical ASLAM approaches that rely on explicit information-theoretic planning at each decision step, our method learns a policy that internalizes the trade-off between exploration progress and uncertainty reduction. The overall architecture is illustrated in Fig. 2. At each timestep, raw LiDAR data are processed by a lightweight fixed-lag SLAM backbone that estimates the robot pose and its associated covariance. From this covariance matrix, we derive a compact scalar uncertainty signal that captures the confidence of the current pose estimate. This uncertainty signal is then fed to the policy network along with perceptual observations (LiDAR scans and IMU orientation). TABLE I: Comparison of the proposed approach and existing methods organized by the task performed by the DRL module.                                                                                                     

> Method Task Training Architecture Reward Design Partial Obs. Generalization Unknown Env. Continuous Action Space Realistic Env. Parallel Training
> Niroui et al. (2019) [10] Frontier selection A3C Intrinsic ✓✓✗✓✗
> Li et al. (2019) [11] Frontier selection DQN Map entropy ✓✓✗✗✗
> Chen et al. (2020) [9] Frontier selection DQN T-opt ✓✓✗✗✗
> Cimurs et al. (2021) [12] Local Motion TD3 Intrinsic ✓✓✓✓✓
> Chaplot et al. (2020) [13] Active localization A3C Posterior belief ✗✓✗✓✗
> Placed et al. (2020) [5] Active SLAM D3QN D-opt ✓✓✗✗✗
> Alcalde et al. (2022) [6] Active SLAM PPO D-opt ✓✓✗✗✗
> Zhao et al. (2024) [7] Active SLAM DDPG Intrinsic ✓✓✓✗✗
> Chen et al. (2024) [8] Active SLAM D3QN Map entropy ✓✓✗✓✗
> Ours Active SLAM PPO D-opt + Exploratory ✓✓✓✓✓

The policy, trained using Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) with a recurrent neural network architecture, outputs continuous linear and angular velocities. The reward function explicitly balances three objectives: (i) spatial exploration, (ii) penalization of high uncertainty regimes, and (iii) active reduction of uncertainty. This structure enables the emergence of adaptive behaviors such as relocalization when uncertainty grows and aggressive exploration when localization is reliable. During initial training, hundreds of robots are simulated in par-allel to learn an exploration policy using the GPU-accelerated fixed-lag SLAM backbone that provides a pose estimate and an uncertainty signal used in the reward function. The learned policy can then be fine-tuned with any ROS2-based SLAM system through a training bridge wrapper that progressively injects the new uncertainty signal, enabling adaptation while avoiding distribution shift. Finally, the resulting policy is evaluated in more complex and realistic testing environments. 

B. Problem Formulation 

Active SLAM paradigm can be formulated as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP): 

P = ( S, A, T, Ω, O, R, γ ) , (1) where:  

> •

S is the latent state space, including the true robot pose 

T ⋆ ∈ SE (n) and the complete environment map M⋆. 

> •

A is the continuous action space.  

> •

T : S × A → Π( S) is the stochastic transition model.  

> •

Ω is the observation space.  

> •

O : S × A → Π(Ω) is the observation model.  

> •

R : S × A → R is the reward function.  

> •

γ ∈ (0 , 1) is the discount factor. Note that the partial observability arises because the robot never has direct access to its true pose nor to the full map; instead, it maintains a belief induced by the SLAM estimator, 

i.e., T ∈ SE (n) and M.At each timestep t, the agent selects at ∈ A, receives observation ot ∈ Ω, and reward Rt based on its new joint state. The objective is then to learn parameters θ of a stochastic policy πθ (a|o) maximizing the expected discounted return: 

π⋆ = arg max 

> πθ

Eπθ

" ∞X

> t=0

γtRt

#

, (2) where Eπθ denotes expectation over πθ . This formulation naturally captures the trade-off between short-term exploration gain and long-term uncertainty reduction. 

C. Observation and Action Spaces 

In ASLAM, the policy must reason not only about collision avoidance and navigation, but also about the evolution of localization uncertainty. Therefore, the observation space must encode both geometric structure and a compact measure of SLAM uncertainty. We use LiDAR range readings to capture local spatial geometry, the robot yaw to disambiguate orienta-tion in partially observable settings, and a scalar uncertainty metric to explicitly inform the agent about the quality of its current state estimate. Then, the observation vector provided to the policy is: 

ot := [ LiDAR 1:128 , yaw t, U t] ∈ O . (3) The first 128 components correspond to range readings. The yaw term provides orientation information. The scalar Ut

encodes the SLAM pose uncertainty. The continuous action space is defined as: 

A := (v, ω ) ∈ R2 | v ∈ (0 , 0.4) , ω ∈ (−1, 1) , (4) where v and ω denote the linear and angular velocities, respectively, in m/s and rad/s. Allowing continuous control increases realism but also makes policy optimization more challenging due to higher dimensionality and potential pathological behaviors. 

D. GPU-Accelerated SLAM Backbone 

Active SLAM under massively parallel DRL training im-poses non-standard requirements on the estimation backend. Beyond accurate pose tracking, the system must provide a smooth and geometrically consistent uncertainty signal Ut at every timestep and execute natively real-time on the GPU. Full-history graph-based systems ( e.g., g2o [15] or iSAM2-style [16] backends) offer global consistency but incur Fig. 2: Overview of the proposed uncertainty-aware Active SLAM framework. trajectory-length–dependent computational cost, retroactive corrections, and unbounded memory growth, making them un-suitable for large-scale vectorized training. Rao–Blackwellized particle-filter methods (e.g., FastSLAM[17]/GMapping[18]) expose uncertainty estimates but suffer from particle degen-eracy and limited GPU efficiency due to sequential resam-pling. Pure scan-matching systems ( e.g., Hector SLAM [19] achieve real-time performance but lack explicit probabilistic covariance modeling. Systems such as Cartographer [20] com-bine scan matching with local pose-graph optimization, but introduce submaps and global loop-closure modules that break deterministic per-step computation. To reconcile probabilistic consistency with scalable and deterministic execution, we adopt a lightweight fixed-lag pose-graph formulation that resembles the local trajectory builder of Cartographer while deliberately omitting submaps and global loop-closure constraints. This design provides constant-time updates independent of trajectory length, explicit covariance extraction from the Gauss–Newton Hessian, bounded mem-ory through sliding-window optimization, and fully batched, vectorized GPU execution. The environment is represented using a 2D log-odds occu-pancy grid, which serves both as the mapping substrate and as the reference model for correlative scan matching. This representation enables efficient probabilistic map updates, fast cell access, and GPU-friendly batched operations. Since scan-matching quality directly influences the Hessian structure, the occupancy-grid representation shapes the statistical properties of the extracted uncertainty signal Ut.We maintain a sliding-window pose graph over the last 

L poses Tt−L:t ⊂ SE (2) , where each node represents the robot pose (x, y, θ ) at a given timestep. Consecutive poses are connected through relative odometry factors derived from the motion model. Each incoming LiDAR scan introduces an additional unary factor obtained via correlative scan matching. For a predicted pose ˆTt, a discretized neighborhood in (∆ x, ∆y, ∆θ) is eval-uated against the log-odds occupancy grid. The best-scoring candidate provides an absolute pose measurement ˜Tt, whose information matrix is scaled according to the normalized match score and the ambiguity margin between the best and second-best candidates. This weighting mitigates overconfi-dence under perceptual aliasing or weak geometric structure. The resulting fixed-lag graph is optimized using a small number of Gauss–Newton iterations. Let x denote the stacked pose vector within the window. The local optimization mini-mizes: 

x⋆ = arg min 

> x

X

> k

∥rk(x)∥2Ωk , (5) where rk are residual terms and Ωk are information matrices. The marginal covariance of the most recent pose is approx-imated as: 

Σt ≈ (Ht)−1 

> last block

, (6) where Ht is the Gauss–Newton Hessian. This block extraction provides an efficient estimate of pose uncertainty without requiring full trajectory marginalization and directly feeds the uncertainty scalar Ut introduced in the previous section. After optimization, the aligned scan is integrated into the occupancy grid using a confidence-dependent update weight proportional to the scan-matching score. This reduces map corruption under ambiguous alignments and improves stability during training. Finally, the entire fixed-lag SLAM pipeline is implemented in a batched and vectorized form. Multiple environments are processed simultaneously, with parallel scan-matching evalu-ations, batched Gauss–Newton linear system assembly, and GPU-accelerated linear algebra for Hessian inversion. This ensures that covariance extraction remains computationally negligible even when training hundreds of agents concurrently. While global loop closure is not enforced, the fixed-lag formu-lation provides sufficient local consistency for the uncertainty-aware Active SLAM behaviors targeted in this work. 

E. Reward Design 

Under the POMDP formulation of ASLAM, the agent must act to reduce belief uncertainty while expanding the coverage of the map. Since belief entropy is not optimized directly in our framework, we construct a surrogate reward that couples exploration gain with uncertainty-aware weighting. The reward function is defined as: 

Rt := 

(

−λcol if collision, 

R∗ 

> explore

− Rabs + R∗ 

> ∆

otherwise, (7) where λcol ∈ R is a penalty hyperparameter chosen suffi-ciently large to dominate any positive reward accumulated within a short horizon, ensuring collision avoidance remains a hard constraint. This structure enforces safety while balanc-ing exploration and uncertainty regulation. Each term in the equation is detailed below. 

1) Exploration Reward: 

Rexplore := λexplore · ∆cells · I , (8) where λexplore ∈ R is an exploratory hyperparameter to balance the ASLAM reward. ∆cells measures novelty in discretized occupancy space. Newly visited cells yield higher reward than revisited ones. Specifically, the factor ∆cells ∈

[0 , 1] represents the cell reward: 1 for entering a new grid cell, and a fractional value for revisits depending on how long ago the cell was last seen, defined as: 

∆cells (x, y ) := 12

t(x, y )

Tepisode 

, (9) where t(x, y ) is the number of timesteps since the last visit to the (x, y ) cell and Tepisode is the episode length in timesteps. This means that revisiting a cell that was already visited during the first timesteps of the episode amounts to approximately half of its initial reward. We discretized the workspace into fixed-size cells. Also, the workspace is vastly larger than the current environment because, in SLAM, we do not know the size of our map a priori . A cell counts as visited when the robot’s ground-truth position (x, y ) falls inside that discretized cell. We use ground-truth information (obtained from Isaac Sim/Lab) here because if we used the SLAM pose estimate, we might count as explored cells that were not actually visited but appeared to do so due to SLAM error. The intrinsic scaling factor I is defined as: 

I := ct−1 + (1 − ct−1) · ιt , (10) with: 

ct−1 := clip 

 Uhi − Ut−1

Uhi 

, 0, 1

2

, (11) 

ιt := clip 

 max( Ut−1 − Ut, 0) 

κ , 0, 1



, (12) where ιt denotes the normalized instantaneous information gain associated with the reduction in pose uncertainty, κ is a normalization constant that defines the uncertainty-reduction scale at which the information gain term saturates and Uhi 

denotes a reference uncertainty level used to normalize the exploration gating term, corresponding to the highest uncer-tainty under which the exploration remains reliable. This formulation adaptively adjusts the exploration incentive depending on the current uncertainty regime. When uncer-tainty is low, the coefficient ct−1 dominates, and exploration is directly encouraged. Conversely, when uncertainty is high, the intrinsic factor increasingly depends on ιt, meaning that exploratory behavior is rewarded only if it effectively reduces uncertainty. In this way, the mechanism prevents blind ex-ploration under poor localization while promoting informative actions that improve state estimation quality. This implements a smooth switching mechanism between exploration and relocalization behaviors. 

2) Absolute Uncertainty Penalty: This term penalizes oper-ating in highly uncertain regimes. The exponential weighting increases sensitivity in high-uncertainty states, ensuring that localization recovery becomes dominant when necessary. 

Rabs := λabs · eUt−1 · Ut−1 , (13) where λabs ∈ R is an absolute-uncertainty hyperparameter to balance the ASLAM reward. 

3) Differential Uncertainty Reward: This term rewards re-duction of uncertainty between consecutive timesteps. Positive values indicate improved localization confidence. 

R∆ := λ∆ · eUt−1 · (Ut−1 − Ut) , (14) where λ∆ ∈ R is a differential-uncertainty hyperparameter to balance the ASLAM reward. 

4) Anti-Wall-Hugging Regularization: To prevent patholog-ical behaviors such as wall hugging, we introduce: 

αhug := clip 

 dmin (t) − dcrash 

df ull − dcrash 

, 0, 1



, (15) where dmin (t) is the minimum lidar range at time t, dcrash 

is the near-collision distance threshold, and dfull is the safer clearance distance beyond which the wall-hugging penalty is fully removed. Finally, the adjusted rewards become: 

R∗ 

> explore

:= Rexplore · αhug , (16) 

R∗ 

> ∆

:= 

(

R∆ · αhug if Ut−1 − Ut > 0

R∆ otherwise . (17) This preserves negative penalties while weakening positive incentives near obstacles. The proposed reward formulation deliberately avoids ex-plicitly penalizing low-speed motion or circular trajectories. Such penalties, while seemingly reasonable, often introduce unintended incentives that can lead to reward-hacking behav-iors when different reward terms become inconsistent. Instead, the structure of our reward function ensures that meaningful progress is achieved only through spatial exploration and effective uncertainty regulation. As a result, the learned policy naturally exhibits the desired behavior: it explores aggressively when localization confidence is high, and progressively shifts toward information-seeking and uncertainty-reducing actions when state estimation degrades. This emergent balance arises from the interaction be-tween exploration incentives and uncertainty-aware modula-tion, rather than from manually imposed motion constraints. 

F. Policy Optimization and Architecture 1) Optimization: We optimize a stochastic policy πθ using PPO. The policy loss is given by: 

rt(θ) = πθ (at | ot)

πθold (at | ot) , (18) 

¯rt(θ) = clip( rt(θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ) , (19) 

LPPO (θ) = −Et

h

min 



rt(θ) ˆAt, ¯rt(θ) ˆAt

i 

. (20) Here, ˆAt is computed via Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE). 

2) Recurrent Layer: We add a recurrent layer since, in order for our agent to learn Active SLAM behavior, it must have an internal representation of temporal context, in particular, whether uncertainty is growing or shrinking. Specifically, the recurrent component is implemented as a single-layer GRU with a hidden size of 256 . We use a GRU rather than an LSTM because it provides the memory required in our pipeline while keeping the architecture lightweight. Another way of tackling this problem would have been to increase the observation vector with additional SLAM information. However, our formulation favors generalization by exposing only a single scalar uncertainty signal Ut from the SLAM backbone, while relying on the recurrent layer to capture the temporal structure necessary for decision making. 

G. SLAM-Agnostic Fine-Tuning via Uncertainty Bridging 

While the policy is trained using our GPU-vectorized fixed-lag SLAM backend, practical deployment may require re-placing this module with an external SLAM system ( e.g., 

any ROS2-based systems). Although the observation structure remains unchanged, different SLAM backbones typically pro-duce uncertainty signals with distinct statistical distributions due to differences in modeling assumptions, scan-matching strategies, or covariance approximation schemes. Directly swapping the uncertainty source would therefore induce a distribution shift in the observation space, potentially desta-bilizing the learned policy. To mitigate this effect, we introduce a training bridge wrapper that progressively injects the new uncertainty signal during fine-tuning. Let U new t denote the uncertainty scalar computed by the external SLAM system. We define a blending coefficient: 

αt := min 



1, tTbridge 



, (21) where Tbridge corresponds to the number of timesteps that provides a sufficiently long adaptation horizon to ensure smooth alignment between uncertainty statistics while preserv-ing policy stability. The uncertainty fed to the policy during fine-tuning then becomes: 

U bridge t := αt · U new t + (1 − αt) · U old t , (22) where U old t corresponds to the uncertainty signal from the original training backend. This gradual interpolation ensures a smooth adaptation of the policy to the new uncertainty statistics, preventing abrupt shifts in the observation distribution and stabilizing gradient updates. Importantly, this wrapper is SLAM-agnostic: any es-timator providing a pose covariance can be integrated without modifying the policy architecture or reward formulation. IV. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 

A. Environment Setup 

All experiments were performed on a laptop with an Intel Core i 7 (13th Gen) CPU, an NVIDIA RTX 4060 8 GB VRAM GPU, and 32 GB RAM. We used Ubuntu 22 .04 , Isaac Sim 4.5,Isaac Lab 2.3.2.Similarly to [5], a TurtleBot3 Burger robot was used, with two differential wheels and a LiDAR sensor that generates 

128 rays equally distributed over the robot’s 180 ◦ front field of view, each with a minimum range of 0.1m, a maximum range of 10 m, two decimal places of precision, and a Gaussian noise model with mean 0 and standard deviation 0.01 . We also incorporate an IMU to our robot, in order to use its yaw information as an input. Following [5] and [6], which use three different environ-ments created in Gazebo, we recreated them on Isaac Sim/Lab. The first environment (see Fig. 1), where our agent is trained, is a simple layout with repeated turns. The second and third environments, which are more difficult (see Env. 2 and Env. 3 in Fig. 3), were used only for testing. We also increased the size of the environments relative to the TurtleBot 3 compared to [5] to allow more maneuverability. We made the walls of the first environment “rougher” to reduce perceptual aliasing, as our SLAM is LiDAR-only. This trick, while cheap, im-proved the training results without hindering computational performance. Since these environments, although useful, are far from real-life environments, we included [21], a built-in realistic warehouse, as a testing environment, exploiting the capabilities of the simulator Isaac Sim (see Env. 4 in Fig. 3). The training of our agent consisted of episodes in which the robot navigates until 2048 timesteps are used or a collision occurs (i.e. gets closer to any obstacle than a defined threshold of 0.15 m). Parallel training was performed using 750 agents simultaneously. The training and reward hyperparameter set-tings can be found on our project’s GitHub. 

B. Discussion of Results 

We can visualize the respective training curves in Fig. 4, which confirms the feasibility of using DRL for Active SLAM in a reasonable time. In [5] and [6], more than 50 hours were required for a simpler policy to emerge; in contrast, the policy we used for our experiments took approximately 4 hours to train on our average laptop. In Fig. 5, we can visualize two curves:  

> •

the smoothed and normalized Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) between the estimated pose from our fixed-lag SLAM and the ground truth from the simulator; Env. 2 Env. 3 Env. 4 

Fig. 3: Isaac Sim/Lab testing environments. Env. 2 and Env. 3 were recreated following [5]. Env. 4 was taken from [21]. 

Fig. 4: Training curves of our pipeline using 750 parallel agents in environment 1. This figure shows that tens of millions of ASLAM training timesteps can be achieved in a few hours with our pipeline.  

> •

our uncertainty signal Ut (smoothed and shifted to the left). Although Ut is noisier, the correlation between the two curves is clear. In fact, 

corr (RM SE, U t+shif t ) = 0 .771956 

where corr represents the Pearson correlation coefficient. A non-trivial comment is that Ut follows the structure of the RMSE but with a delay. This can be interpreted as “first the robot starts getting lost; then it becomes uncertain about its localization,” which intuitively makes sense. Because of this inherent delay, the recurrent layer becomes a fundamental piece of our pipeline, allowing our agent to capture this temporal context. In Table II, we can see a comparison between:  

> •

PPO exploratory , a trained agent that completely neglects covariance both as an observation and as a reward;  

> •

PPO uncertainty , which is the full version of our agent and considers exploratory, uncertainty, and anti-wall-hugging rewards. We observe that our PPO uncertainty agent has a significantly lower collision rate, and that its best run explored a larger percentage of the entire environment, where we define this exploration metric as the percentage of the environment “seen” by the robot’s LiDAR. We also compared these two trained agents with a random agent and a classical frontier-based, non-learning exploration agent, as in [22], but these results were not included because both performed extremely poorly in our experiments. Finally, we performed a fine-tuning of our PPO uncertainty 

agent using our training bridge wrapper along with 

Fig. 5: Correlation between RMSE (estimated pose - GT) and 

Ut. This graph was computed in Environment 1.  

> (a) Env. 1 (b) Env. 2 (c) Env. 3

Fig. 6: Occupancy grids created by our fine-tuned uncertainty-aware agent using slam_toolbox and rviz2 . Red circles indicate the starting position, whereas red arrows indicate the trajectory followed by the robot. 

slam_toolbox [23], a full SLAM system that includes a global loop-closure module. In Fig. 6, we can visualize the occupancy grids along with the trajectories created by our fine-tuned uncertainty-aware agent using the slam_toolbox 

and rviz2 [24] ROS 2 packages. The trajectories show that the agent tends to follow structured exploration patterns that progressively expand the explored region while maintaining localization stability. In the most complex environment (Env. 3) the robot revisits previously explored areas, implicitly performing loop-like motions that help reduce pose uncertainty and improve map consistency. This behavior results from the uncertainty-aware ASLAM formulation. V. CONCLUSIONS In this work, we present the first framework for Mas-sive Parallel Deep Reinforcement Learning applied to Active SLAM. Our main contribution is a complete end-to-end system enabling scalable and massively parallel training in the Isaac Sim/Lab simulator. In addition, we included a training bridge wrapper, which allows the fine-tuning of our already trained agents with any ROS 2 SLAM package. We showed that our method not only accelerates training but also allows for the use of a continuous action space and the exploration of more challenging scenarios. This approach drastically reduces training time, achieving the desired behav-ior in approximately 4 hours, compared to the more than 50 

hours estimated in prior works. The training bridge wrapper is optimized for live data transfer between Isaac Lab and ROS 2 during training and is flexible enough to be used in other robotic tasks that require the use of DRL, Isaac Lab and ROS 2 in sync. TABLE II: Test results across three environments letting the agent move for a maximum of 3000 timesteps ( 5 minutes) or until a collision occurs. The results were averaged across 100 

runs. The collision rate represents actual physical collisions against obstacles.                       

> Environment Agent Unique visited cells Best run map explored (%) Collision rate
> PPO exploratory 412 100 0PPO uncertainty 464 100 0
> PPO exploratory 482 87 24% PPO uncertainty 416 92 11%
> PPO exploratory 736 100 3% PPO uncertainty 717 100 1%

The developed framework has been publicly released to ensure experiment repeatability and foster community adop-tion. We consider this work a key milestone toward making autonomous exploration and Active SLAM with DRL scalable and efficient. REFERENCES 

[1] C. Cadena, L. Carlone, H. Carrillo, Y. Latif, D. Scara-muzza, J. Neira, I. Reid, and J. J. Leonard, “Past, present, and future of simultaneous localization and mapping: Toward the robust-perception age,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1309–1332, 2016. [2] H. J. S. Feder, J. J. Leonard, and C. M. Smith, “Adaptive mobile robot navigation and mapping,” The International Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 650– 668, 1999. [3] J. A. Placed, C.-L. To, J. Neira, J. D. Tard´ os, and J. A. Castellanos, “A survey on active simultaneous localiza-tion and mapping: State of the art and new frontiers,” 

IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 1686– 1705, 2023. [4] K. Arulkumaran, M. P. Deisenroth, M. Brundage, and A. A. Bharath, “Deep reinforcement learning: A brief survey,” IEEE signal processing magazine , vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 26–38, 2017. [5] J. A. Placed and J. A. Castellanos, “A deep reinforcement learning approach for active slam,” Applied Sciences ,vol. 10, no. 23, p. 8386, 2020. [6] M. Alcalde, M. Ferreira, P. Gonz´ alez, F. Andrade, and G. Tejera, “Da-slam: Deep active slam based on deep reinforcement learning,” in 2022 Latin American Robotics Symposium (LARS), 2022 Brazilian Symposium on Robotics (SBR), and 2022 Workshop on Robotics in Education (WRE) . IEEE, 2022, pp. 282–287. [7] S. Zhao and S.-H. Hwang, “Exploration- and exploitation-driven deep deterministic policy gradient for active slam in unknown indoor environments,” 

Electronics , vol. 13, no. 5, p. 999, 2024. [8] J. Chen, K. Wu, M. Hu, P. N. Suganthan, and A. Makur, “Lidar-based end-to-end active slam using deep rein-forcement learning in large-scale environments,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology , vol. 73, no. 10, pp. 14 187–14 200, 2024. [9] F. Chen, J. D. Martin, Y. Huang, J. Wang, and B. Englot, “Autonomous exploration under uncertainty via deep reinforcement learning on graphs,” in 2020 IEEE/RSJ in-ternational conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 6140–6147. [10] F. Niroui, K. Zhang, Z. Kashino, and G. Nejat, “Deep reinforcement learning robot for search and rescue appli-cations: Exploration in unknown cluttered environments,” 

IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 610–617, 2019. [11] H. Li, Q. Zhang, and D. Zhao, “Deep reinforcement learning-based automatic exploration for navigation in unknown environment,” IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems , vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 2064– 2076, 2019. [12] R. Cimurs, I. H. Suh, and J. H. Lee, “Goal-driven au-tonomous exploration through deep reinforcement learn-ing,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 730–737, 2021. [13] D. S. Chaplot, D. Gandhi, S. Gupta, A. Gupta, and R. Salakhutdinov, “Learning to explore using active neural slam,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05155 , 2020. [14] Z. Xu, X. Han, H. Shen, H. Jin, and K. Shimada, “Navrl: Learning safe flight in dynamic environments,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 3668–3675, 2025. [15] R. K¨ ummerle, G. Grisetti, H. Strasdat, K. Konolige, and W. Burgard, “g2o: A general framework for graph optimization,” in 2011 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2011, pp. 3607–3613. [16] M. Kaess, H. Johannsson, R. Roberts, V. Ila, J. J. Leonard, and F. Dellaert, “isam2: Incremental smoothing and mapping using the bayes tree,” The International Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 216– 235, 2012. [17] M. Montemerlo, S. Thrun, D. Koller, and B. Wegbreit, “Fastslam: A factored solution to the simultaneous lo-calization and mapping problem,” in Proceedings of the AAAI National Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,2002, pp. 593–598. [18] G. Grisetti, C. Stachniss, and W. Burgard, “Improved techniques for grid mapping with rao-blackwellized par-ticle filters,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 34–46, 2007. [19] S. Kohlbrecher, O. von Stryk, J. Meyer, and U. Klingauf, “A flexible and scalable SLAM system with full 3d mo-tion estimation,” in 2011 IEEE International Symposium on Safety, Security, and Rescue Robotics (SSRR) , 2011, pp. 155–160. [20] W. Hess, D. Kohler, H. Rapp, and D. Andor, “Real-time loop closure in 2d LIDAR SLAM,” in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2016, pp. 1271–1278. [21] NVIDIA Corporation, “Environment Assets — Isaac Sim Documentation (v4.5.0).” [22] B. Yamauchi, “A frontier-based approach for autonomous exploration,” in Proceedings of the 1997 IEEE Inter-national Symposium on Computational Intelligence in Robotics and Automation (CIRA ’97) , Monterey, CA, USA, 1997, pp. 146–151. [23] S. Macenski, “slam toolbox: Slam for ros 2 with lifelong mapping and localization,” 2019. [24] Open Robotics, “rviz2: 3d visualization tool for ros 2,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/ros2/rviz